<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">
<TEI.2 lang="en">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title>Uncle's dream; And The Permanent Husband</title>
	        <author><name reg="Dostoieffsky, Fedor">Fedor Dostoieffsky</name></author>
                <respStmt><resp>Translated by</resp><name reg="Whishaw, Frederick">Frederick Whishaw</name></respStmt>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
                <pubPlace>Urbana</pubPlace>
                <date>2011-12-06</date>
                <idno type='etext-no'>38241</idno>
                <availability>
                  <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere
                  at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever.
                  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
                  the terms of the Project Gutenberg License online at
                  www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
                </availability>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
              <bibl>
                Created electronically.
             </bibl>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
        <encodingDesc>
        </encodingDesc>
        <profileDesc>
          <langUsage>
            <language id="it" />
            <language id="la" />
            <language id="fr" />
            <language id="en" />
            <language id="de" />
          </langUsage>
        </profileDesc>
        <revisionDesc>
          <change>
            <date value="2011-12-06">December 6, 2011</date>
            <respStmt>
                <resp>Produced by <name>Hunter Monroe</name>
                and the <name>Online Distributed Proofreading Team</name> at
                &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
                (This book was produced from scanned images of
                public domain material from the Google
                Print project.)</resp>
            </respStmt>
            <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
          </change>
        </revisionDesc>
    </teiHeader>

    <pgExtensions>
      <pgStyleSheet>
    figure           { text-align: center; page-float: 'htb' }
    .floatleft       { float: left; margin-right: 2em }
    .floatright      { float: right; margin-left: 2em }

        .bold        { font-weight: bold }
        .italic      { font-style: italic }
        .indent      { margin-left: 2 }
        .antiqua     { font-weight: bold }
        .gesperrt    { font-style: italic }
        .smallcaps   { font-variant: small-caps }
      </pgStyleSheet>
  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>&nbsp;&nbsp;</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>

    </pgExtensions>

<text>
<front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>

    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: right">
        <p rend='italic;text-align: center'>VIZETELLY'S RUSSIAN NOVELS.</p><lb /><lb /><lb />
        <p rend="font-size: x-large;text-align: center">Uncle's Dream;<lb /><lb />
        AND<lb /><lb />
        The Permanent Husband.<lb /><lb />

</p>
    </div>


    <div rend="page-break-before: right">
      <p rend="font-size: x-large;text-align: center">CELEBRATED RUSSIAN NOVELS</p>
    </div>

<div>
<p rend="text-align: center">
By FEDOR DOSTOIEFFSKY.<lb /><lb />

<hi rend='italic'>Translated from the original Russian by Fred. Whishaw.</hi><lb /><lb />
</p><p>
<quote rend="display"><q>There are three Russian novelists who, though, with one exception, little
known out of their own country, stand head and shoulders above most of their
contemporaries. In the opinion of some not indifferent critics, they are superior
to all other novelists of this generation. Two of them, Dostoieffsky and
Turgenieff, died not long ago; the third, Lyof Tolstoi, still lives. The one with
the most marked individuality of character, probably the most highly gifted,
was unquestionably Dostoieffsky.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Spectator.</hi></quote>
<lb /><lb />
</p>
<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend='italic'>In crown 8vo. containing nearly 500 pages, price 6s.</hi>
<lb /><lb />


THE IDIOT.<lb /><lb />
</p>
<p>
<quote rend="display"><q>Is unquestionably a work of great power and originality. M. Dostoieffsky
crowds his canvas with living organisms, depicted with extreme
vividness.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Scotsman.</hi></quote><lb /><lb />
</p>
<p rend="text-align: center">

<hi rend='italic'>In crown 8vo, price 5s.</hi><lb /><lb />

THE FRIEND OF THE FAMILY; <hi rend='smallcaps'>AND</hi> THE
GAMBLER.<lb /><lb />

</p>
<p>
<quote rend="display"><q>Dostoieffsky is one of the keenest observers of humanity amongst
modern novelists. Both stories are very valuable as pictures of a society and a
people with whom we are imperfectly acquainted, but who deserve the closest
scrutiny.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Public Opinion.</hi></quote><lb /><lb />
</p>
<p rend="text-align: center">

<hi rend='italic'>Third edition. In crown 8vo, with Portrait and Memoir, price 5s.</hi><lb /><lb />

INJURY AND INSULT.<lb /><lb />

</p>
<p>
<quote rend="display"><q>That <q>Injury and Insult</q> is a powerful novel few will deny. Vania is
a marvellous character. Once read, the book can never be forgotten.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>St.
Stephen's Review.</hi><lb /><lb />

<q>A masterpiece of fiction. The author has treated with consummate tact
the difficult character of Natasha, <q>the incarnation of the slave of passion.</q>
She lives and breathes in these vivid pages, and the reader is drawn into the
vortex of her anguish, and rejoices when she breaks free from her chain.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Morning
Post.</hi></quote><lb /><lb />
</p>
<p rend="text-align: center">


<hi rend='italic'>Third edition. In crown 8vo, 450 pages, price 6s.</hi><lb /><lb />

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT.<lb /><lb />

</p>
<p>
<quote rend="display"><q>Dostoieffsky is one of the most remarkable of modern writers, and his
book, <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Crime and Punishment</hi></q> is one of the most moving of modern novels.
It is the story of a murder and of the punishment which dogs the murderer;
and its effect is unique in fiction. It is realism, but such realism as M. Zola
and his followers do not dream of. The reader knows the personages&mdash;strange
grotesque, terrible personages they are&mdash;more intimately than if he
had been years with them in the flesh. He is constrained to live their lives,
to suffer their tortures, to scheme and resist with them, exult with them,
weep and laugh and despair with them; he breathes the very breath of their
nostrils, and with the madness that comes upon them he is afflicted even as
they. This sounds extravagant praise, no doubt; but only to those who have
not read the volume. To those who have, we are sure that it will appear rather
under the mark than otherwise.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>The Athen&aelig;um.</hi></quote><lb /><lb />
</p>




    <div rend="page-break-before: right;text-align: center">
        <p rend='italic'>VIZETELLY'S RUSSIAN NOVELS.</p><lb /><lb /><lb />
        <p rend="font-size: x-large">Uncle's Dream;<lb /><lb />
        AND<lb /><lb />
        The Permanent Husband.<lb /><lb />

By FEDOR DOSTOIEFFSKY,<lb /><lb /></p>

<p rend="font-size: large">AUTHOR OF <q>CRIME AND PUNISHMENT,</q> <q>INJURY AND INSULT,</q> <q>THE IDIOT,</q>
<q>THE FRIEND OF THE FAMILY; AND THE GAMBLER.</q><lb /><lb />

TRANSLATED FROM THE RUSSIAN BY FREDERICK WHISHAW.<lb /><lb />

<figure url="images/deco.jpg">
  <figDesc>Illustration</figDesc>
</figure>

LONDON:<lb /><lb />

<hi rend='italic'>VIZETELLY &amp; CO., 16, HENRIETTA STREET,
COVENT GARDEN.</hi><lb /><lb />

1888.</p>
    </div>

</div>
</front>

<body>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
<head>Uncle's Dream.</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>The Permanent Husband</head>
      <divGen type="toc2" />
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="pdf" />
<head>UNCLE'S DREAM.</head>
<p></p>
</div>


<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER I.</head>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna Moskaleva was the principal lady
of Mordasoff&mdash;there was no doubt whatever on that point!
She always bore herself as though <emph>she</emph> did not care a fig for
anyone, but as though no one else could do without <emph>her</emph>.
True, there were uncommonly few who loved her&mdash;in fact I
may say that very many detested her; still, everyone was
afraid of her, and that was what she liked!
</p>

<p>
Now, why did Maria Alexandrovna, who dearly loves scandal,
and cannot sleep at night unless she has heard something
new and piquant the day before,&mdash;why, or how did she
know how to bear herself so that it would never strike anyone,
looking at her, to suppose that the dignified lady was
the most inveterate scandal-monger in the world&mdash;or at all
events in Mordasoff? On the contrary, anyone would have
said at once, that scandals and such-like pettiness must
vanish in her presence; and that scandal-mongers, caught
red-handed by Maria Alexandrovna, would blush and
tremble, like schoolboys at the entrance of the master; and
that the talk would immediately be diverted into channels
of the loftiest and most sublime subjects so soon as she
entered the room. Maria Alexandrovna knew many deadly
and scandalous secrets of certain other Mordasoff inhabitants,
which, if she liked to reveal them at any convenient
opportunity, would produce results little less terrible than
the earthquake of Lisbon. Still, she was very quiet about
the secrets she knew, and never let them out except in cases
of absolute need, and then only to her nearest and dearest
friends. She liked to hint that she knew certain things,
and frighten people out of their wits; preferring to keep
them in a state of perpetual terror, rather than crush them
altogether.
</p>

<p>
This was real talent&mdash;the talent of tactics.
</p>

<p>
We all considered Maria Alexandrovna as our type and
model of irreproachable <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>comme-il-faut</foreign>! She had no rival in
this respect in Mordasoff! She could kill and annihilate
and pulverize any rival with a single word. We have seen
her do it; and all the while she would look as though she
had not even observed that she had let the fatal word fall.
</p>

<p>
Everyone knows that this trait is a speciality of the
highest circles.
</p>

<p>
Her circle of friends was large. Many visitors to
Mordasoff left the town again in an ecstasy over her
reception of them, and carried on a correspondence with
her afterwards! Somebody even addressed some poetry to
her, which she showed about the place with great pride.
The novelist who came to the town used to read his novel
to her of an evening, and ended by dedicating it to her;
which produced a very agreeable effect. A certain German
professor, who came from Carlsbad to inquire into the
question of a little worm with horns which abounds in our
part of the world, and who wrote and published four large
quarto volumes about this same little insect, was so
delighted and ravished with her amiability and kindness
that to this very day he carries on a most improving correspondence
upon moral subjects from far Carlsbad!
</p>

<p>
Some people have compared Maria Alexandrovna, in
certain respects, with Napoleon. Of course it may have
been her enemies who did so, in order to bring Maria
Alexandrovna to scorn; but all I can say is, How is it that
Napoleon, when he rose to his highest, that <emph>too</emph> high estate
of his, became giddy and fell? Historians of the old
school have ascribed this to the fact that he was not only
not of royal blood, but was not even a gentleman! and
therefore when he rose too high, he thought of his proper
place, the ground, became giddy and fell! But why did
not Maria Alexandrovna's head whirl? And how was it
that she could always keep her place as the first lady of
Mordasoff?
</p>

<p>
People have often said this sort of thing of Maria
Alexandrovna; for instance: <q>Oh&mdash;yes, but how would she
act under such and such difficult circumstances?</q> Yet,
when the circumstances arose, Maria Alexandrovna invariably
rose also to the emergency! For instance, when
her husband&mdash;Afanassy Matveyevitch&mdash;was obliged to
throw up his appointment, out of pure incapacity and
feebleness of intellect, just before the government inspector
came down to look into matters, all Mordasoff danced
with delight to think that she would be down on her knees
to this inspector, begging and beseeching and weeping and
praying&mdash;in fact, that she would drop her wings and fall;
but, bless you, nothing of the sort happened! Maria
Alexandrovna quite understood that her husband was
beyond praying for: he must retire. So she only rearranged
her affairs a little, in such a manner that she lost
not a scrap of her influence in the place, and her house still
remained the acknowledged head of all Mordasoff Society!
</p>

<p>
The procurer's wife, Anna Nicolaevna Antipova, the
sworn foe of Maria Alexandrovna, though a friend so far as
could be judged outside, had already blown the trumpet of
victory over her rival! But when Society found that
Maria Alexandrovna was extremely difficult to put down,
they were obliged to conclude that the latter had struck her
roots far deeper than they had thought for.
</p>

<p>
As I have mentioned Afanassy Matveyevitch, Maria
Alexandrovna's husband, I may as well add a few words
about him in this place.
</p>

<p>
Firstly, then, he was a most presentable man, so far as
exterior goes, and a very high-principled person besides;
but in critical moments he used to lose his head and stand
looking like a sheep which has come across a new gate. He
looked very majestic and dignified in his dress-coat and
white tie at dinner parties, and so on; but his dignity only
lasted until he opened his mouth to speak; for then&mdash;well,
you'd better have shut your ears, ladies and gentlemen,
when he began to talk&mdash;that's all! Everyone agreed that
he was quite unworthy to be Maria Alexandrovna's husband.
He only sat in his place by virtue of his wife's genius. In my
humble opinion he ought long ago to have been derogated
to the office of frightening sparrows in the kitchen garden.
There, and only there, would he have been in his proper
sphere, and doing some good to his fellow countrymen.
</p>

<p>
Therefore, I think Maria Alexandrovna did a very wise
thing when she sent him away to her village, about a couple
of miles from town, where she possessed a property of
some hundred and twenty souls&mdash;which, to tell the truth,
was all she had to keep up the respectability and grandeur
of her noble house upon!
</p>

<p>
Everybody knew that Afanassy was only kept because he
had earned a salary and perquisites; so that when he
ceased to earn the said salary and perquisites, it surprised
no-one to learn that he was sent away&mdash;<q>returned empty</q>
to the village, as useless and fit for nothing! In fact, everyone
praised his wife for her soundness of judgment and
decision of character!
</p>

<p>
Afanassy lived in clover at the village. I called on him
there once and spent a very pleasant hour. He tied on his
white ties, cleaned his boots himself (not because he had no-one
to do it for him, but for the sake of art, for he loved to
have them <emph>shine</emph>), went to the bath as often as he could, had
tea four times a day, and was as contented as possible.
</p>

<p>
Do you remember, a year and a half ago, the dreadful
stories that were afoot about Zenaida, Maria Alexandrovna's
and Afanassy's daughter? Zenaida was undoubtedly a fine,
handsome, well-educated girl; but she was now twenty-three
years old, and not married yet. Among the reasons
put forth for Zenaida being still a maid, one of the strongest
was those dark rumours about a strange attachment, a
year and a half ago, with the schoolmaster of the place&mdash;rumours
not hushed up even to this day. Yes, to this very
day they tell of a love-letter, written by Zina, as she was
called, and handed all about Mordasoff. But kindly tell me,
who ever saw this letter? If it went from hand to hand
what became of it? Everyone seems to have heard of it,
but no one ever saw it! At all events, <emph>I</emph> have never met
anyone who actually saw the letter with his own eyes.
If you drop a hint to Maria Alexandrovna about it, she
simply does not understand you.
</p>

<p>
Well, supposing that there <emph>was</emph> something, and that Zina
did write such a letter; what dexterity and skill of Maria
Alexandrovna, to have so ably nipped the bud of the
scandal! I feel sure that Zina <emph>did</emph> write the letter; but
Maria Alexandrovna has managed so well that there is not
a trace, not a shred of evidence of the existence of it.
Goodness knows how she must have worked and planned
to save the reputation of this only daughter of hers; but
she managed it somehow.
</p>

<p>
As for Zina not having married, there's nothing surprising
in that. Why, what sort of a husband could be found for
her in Mordasoff? Zina ought to marry a reigning prince,
if anyone! Did you ever see such a beauty among
beauties as Zina? I think not. Of course, she was very
proud&mdash;too proud.
</p>

<p>
There was Mosgliakoff&mdash;some people said she was likely
to end by marrying <emph>him</emph>; but I never thought so. Why,
what was there in Mosgliakoff? True, he was young and
good looking, and possessed an estate of a hundred and
fifty souls, and was a Petersburg swell; but, in the first
place, I don't think there was much inside his head. He
was such a funny, new-idea sort of man. Besides, what is
an estate of a hundred and fifty souls, according to present
notions? Oh, no; that's a marriage that never could come
off.
</p>

<p>
<milestone unit="tb" rend="rule: 50%" />
</p>

<p>
There, kind reader, all you have just read was written by
me some five months ago, for my own amusement. I
admit, I am rather partial to Maria Alexandrovna; and I
wished to write some sort of laudatory account of that
charming woman, and to mould it into the form of one of
those playful <q>letters to a friend,</q> purporting to have
been written in the old golden days (which will never
return&mdash;thank Heaven!) to one of the periodicals of the
time, <q>The Northern Bee,</q> or some such paper. But since
I have no <q>friend,</q> and since I am, besides, naturally of a
timid disposition, and especially so as to my literary efforts,
the essay remained on my writing-table, as a memorial of
my early literary attempts and in memory of the peaceful
occupation of a moment or two of leisure.
</p>

<p>
Well, five months have gone by, and lo! great things
have happened at Mordasoff!
</p>

<p>
Prince K&mdash;&mdash; drove into the town at an early hour
one fine morning, and put up at Maria Alexandrovna's
house! The prince only stayed three days, but his visit
proved pregnant with the most fatal consequences. I will
say more&mdash;the prince brought about what was, in a certain
sense, a revolution in the town, an account of which
revolution will, of course, comprise some of the most
important events that have ever happened in Mordasoff;
and I have determined at last, after many heart-sinkings
and flutterings, and much doubt, to arrange the story into
the orthodox literary form of a novel, and present it to the
indulgent Public! My tale will include a narrative of the
Rise and Greatness and Triumphant Fall of Maria Alexandrovna,
and of all her House in Mordasoff, a theme both
worthy of, and attractive to any writer!
</p>

<p>
Of course I must first explain why there should have been
anything extraordinary in the fact that Prince K&mdash;&mdash;
came to Mordasoff, and put up at Maria Alexandrovna's
mansion. And in order to do this, I must first be allowed to
say a few words about this same Prince K&mdash;&mdash;. This I shall
now do. A short biography of the nobleman is absolutely
necessary to the further working out of my story. So,
reader, you must excuse me.
</p>


</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER II.</head>

<p>
I will begin, then, by stating that Prince K&mdash;&mdash; was not
so very, very old, although, to look at him, you would think
he <emph>must</emph> fall to pieces every moment, so decayed, or rather,
worn-out was he. At Mordasoff all sorts of strange things
were told of him. Some declared that the old prince's
wits had forsaken him. All agreed that it was passing
strange that the owner of a magnificent property of four
thousand souls, a man of rank, and one who could have, if
he liked, a great influence, and play a great part in his
country's affairs; that such a man should live all alone upon
his estate, and make an absolute hermit of himself, as did
Prince K&mdash;&mdash;. Many who had known him a few years
before insisted upon it that he was very far from loving solitude
then, and was as unlike a hermit as anyone could
possibly be.
</p>

<p>
However, here is all I have been able to learn authentically
as to his antecedents, etc.:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
Some time or other, in his younger days&mdash;which must
have been a mighty long while ago,&mdash;the prince made a
most brilliant entry into life. He knocked about and enjoyed
himself, and sang romantic songs, and wrote epigrams,
and led a fast life generally, very often abroad, and was full
of gifts and intellectual capacity.
</p>

<p>
Of course he very soon ran through his means, and when
old age approached, he suddenly found himself almost penniless.
Somebody recommended him to betake himself to
his country seat, which was about to be sold by public auction.
So off he went with that intention; but called in at
Mordasoff, and stopped there six months. He liked this
provincial life, and while in our town he spent every farthing
he had left in the world, continuing his reckless life as of
old, galivanting about, and forming intimacies with half the
ladies of Mordasoff.
</p>

<p>
He was a kind-hearted, good sort of a man, but, of course,
not without certain princely failings, which, however, were
accounted here to be nothing but evidences of the highest
breeding, and for this reason caused a good effect instead of
aversion. The ladies, especially, were in a state of perpetual
ecstasy over their dear guest. They cherished the fondest
and tenderest recollections of him. There were also strange
traditions and rumours about the prince. It was said that
he spent more than half the day at his toilet table; and that
he was, in fact, made up of all sorts of little bits. No one
could say when or how he had managed to fall to pieces so
completely.
</p>

<p>
He wore a wig, whiskers, moustache, and even an
<q>espagnole,</q> all false to a hair, and of a lovely raven
black; besides which he painted and rouged every day. It
was even said that he managed to do away with his
wrinkles by means of <emph>hidden springs</emph>&mdash;hidden somehow in
his wig. It was said, further, that he wore stays, in consequence
of the want of a rib which he had lost in Italy,
through being caused to fly, involuntarily, out of a window
during a certain love affair. He limped with his left foot,
and it was whispered that the said foot was a cork one&mdash;a very
scientific member, made for him in place of the real one
which came to grief during another love affair, in Paris this
time. But what will not people say? At all events, I
know for a fact that his right eye was a glass one; beautifully
made, I confess, but still&mdash;glass. His teeth were false
too.
</p>

<p>
For whole days at a time he used to wash himself in all
sorts of patent waters and scents and pomades.
</p>

<p>
However, no one could deny that even then he was
beginning to indulge in senile drivel and chatter. It
appeared his career was about over; he had seen his best
days, everyone knew that he had not a copeck left in the
world!
</p>

<p>
Then, suddenly and unexpectedly, an old relative of his&mdash;who
had always lived in Paris, but from whom he never
had had the slightest hope of inheritance&mdash;died, after having
buried her legal heir exactly a month before! The prince,
to his utter astonishment, turned out to be the next heir,
and a beautiful property of four thousand serfs, just forty
miles from Mordasoff, became his&mdash;absolutely and unquestionably!
</p>

<p>
He immediately started off to Petersburg, to see to his
affairs. Before he departed, however, the ladies of our
town gave him a magnificent subscription banquet. They
tell how bewitching and delightful the prince was at this last
dinner; how he punned and joked and told the most
<emph>unusual</emph> stories; and how he promised to come to Donchanovo
(his new property) very soon, and gave his word that on
his arrival he would give endless balls and garden parties
and picnics and fireworks and entertainments of all kinds,
for his friends here.
</p>

<p>
For a whole year after his departure, the ladies of the
place talked of nothing but these promised festivities; and
awaited the arrival of the <q>dear old man</q> with the utmost
impatience. At last the prince arrived; but to the disappointment
and astonishment of everyone, he did not even
call in at Mordasoff on the way; and on his arrival at
Donchanovo he shut himself up there, as I have expressed
it before, like a very hermit.
</p>

<p>
All sorts of fantastic rumours were bruited about, and
from this time the prince's life and history became most
secret, mysterious, and incomprehensible.
</p>

<p>
In the first place, it was declared that the prince had not
been very successful in St. Petersburg; that many of his
relations&mdash;future heirs and heirs presumptive, and so on,
had wished to put the Prince under some kind of restraint,
on the plea of <q>feebleness of intellect;</q> probably fearing
that he would run through this property as he had done
with the last! And more, some of them went so far as to
suggest that he should be popped into a lunatic asylum;
and he was only saved by the interference of one of the
nearest of kin, who pointed out that the poor old prince
was more than half dead already, and that the rest of him
must inevitably soon die too; and that then the property
would come down to them safely enough without the need
of the lunatic asylum. I repeat, what will not people say?
Especially at our place, Mordasoff! All this, it was said,
had frightened the prince dreadfully; so that his nature
seemed to change entirely, and he came down to live a
hermit life at Donchanovo.
</p>

<p>
Some of our Mordasoff folk went over to welcome him
on his arrival; but they were either not received at all or
received in the strangest fashion. The prince did not
recognise his old friends: many people explained that he
did not <emph>wish</emph> to recognise them. Among other visitors to
Donchanovo was the Governor.
</p>

<p>
On the return of the latter from his visit, he declared that
the prince was undoubtedly a little <q>off his head.</q> The
Governor always made a face if anyone reminded him of
this visit of his to Donchanovo. The ladies were dreadfully
offended.
</p>

<p>
At last an important fact was revealed: namely, that
there was with the prince, and apparently in authority over
him, some unknown person of the name of Stepanida
Matveyevna, who had come down with him from St. Petersburg;
an elderly fat woman in a calico dress, who went
about with the house-keys in her hand; and that the prince
obeyed this woman like a little child, and did not dare take
a step without her leave; that she washed him and dressed
him and soothed and petted him just like a nurse with a
baby; and lastly, that she kept all visitors away from him,
even relations&mdash;who, little by little, had begun to pervade
the place rather too frequently, for the purpose of seeing
that all was right.
</p>

<p>
It was said that this person managed not only the prince,
but his estate too: she turned off bailiffs and clerks, she
encashed the rents, she looked after things in general&mdash;and
did it well, too; so that the peasants blessed their fate
under her rule.
</p>

<p>
As for the prince, it was rumoured that he spent his days
now almost entirely at his toilet-table, trying on wigs and
dress-coats, and that the rest of his time was spent playing
cards and games with Stepanida Matveyevna, and riding on
a quiet old English mare. On such occasions his nurse
always accompanied him in a covered droshky, because the
prince liked to ride out of bravado, but was most unsafe in
his saddle.
</p>

<p>
He had been seen on foot too, in a long great coat and a
straw hat with a wide brim; a pink silk lady's tie round his
neck, and a basket on his arm for mushrooms and flowers
and berries, and so on, which he collected. The nurse
accompanied him, and a few yards behind walked a manservant,
while a carriage was in attendance on the high road
at the side. When any peasant happened to meet him, and
with low bow, and hat in hand, said, <q>Good morning, your
highness&mdash;our beloved Sun, and Father of us all,</q> or some
such Russian greeting, he would stick his eye-glass in his
eye, nod his head and say, with great urbanity, and in
French, <q>Bon jour, mon ami, bon jour!</q>
</p>

<p>
Lots of other rumours there were&mdash;in fact, our folks
could not forget that the prince lived so near them.
</p>

<p>
What, then, must have been the general amazement
when one fine day it was trumpeted abroad that the prince&mdash;their
curious old hermit-prince, had arrived at Mordasoff,
and put up at Maria Alexandrovna's house!
</p>

<p>
Agitation and bewilderment were the order of the day;
everybody waited for explanations, and asked one another
what could be the meaning of this mystery? Some proposed
to go and see for themselves; all agreed that it was
<emph>most</emph> extraordinary. The ladies wrote notes to each other,
came and whispered to one another, and sent their maids
and husbands to find out more.
</p>

<p>
What was particularly strange was, why had the prince
put up at Maria Alexandrovna's, and not somewhere else?
This fact annoyed everyone; but, most of all, Mrs. Antipova,
who happened to be a distant relative of the prince.
</p>

<p>
However, in order to clear up all these mysteries and find
an answer to all these questions, we must ourselves go and
see Maria Alexandrovna. Will you follow me in, kind reader?
It is only ten in the morning, certainly, as you point out;
but I daresay she will receive such intimate friends, all the
same. Oh, yes; she'll see us all right.
</p>



</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER III.</head>

<p>
It is ten o'clock in the morning, and we are at Maria
Alexandrovna's, and in that room which the mistress calls
her <q>salon</q> on great occasions; she has a boudoir besides.
</p>

<p>
In this salon the walls are prettily papered, and the floor
is nicely painted; the furniture is mostly red; there is a
fireplace, and on the mantelpiece a bronze clock with some
figure&mdash;a Cupid&mdash;upon it, in dreadfully bad taste. There
are large looking-glasses between the windows. Against
the back wall there stands a magnificent grand piano&mdash;Zina's&mdash;for
Zina is a musician. On a table in the middle
of the room hisses a silver tea-urn, with a very pretty tea-set
alongside of it.
</p>

<p>
There is a lady pouring out tea, a distant relative of the
family, and living with Maria Alexandrovna in that capacity,
one Nastasia Petrovna Ziablova. She is a widow of over
thirty, a brunette with a fresh-looking face and lively black
eyes, not at all bad looking.
</p>

<p>
She is of a very animated disposition, laughs a great deal,
is fond of scandal, of course; and can manage her own
little affairs very nicely. She has two children somewhere,
being educated. She would much like to marry again.
Her last husband was a military man.
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna herself is sitting at the fire in a very
benign frame of mind; she is dressed in a pale-green dress,
which becomes her very well; she is unspeakably delighted
at the arrival of the Prince, who, at this moment, is sitting
upstairs, at his toilet table. She is so happy, that she does
not even attempt to conceal her joy. A young man is
standing before her and relating something in an animated
way; one can see in his eyes that he wishes to curry favour
with his listener.
</p>

<p>
This young fellow is about twenty-five years old, and his
manners are decidedly good, though he has a silly way of
going into raptures, and has, besides, a good deal too much
of the <q>funny man</q> about him. He is well dressed and
his hair is light; he is not a bad-looking fellow. But we
have already heard of this gentleman: he is Mr. Mosgliakoff.
Maria Alexandrovna considers him rather a stupid sort of a
man, but receives him very well. He is an aspirant for the
hand of her daughter Zina, whom, according to his own
account, he loves to distraction. In his conversation, he
refers to Zina every other minute, and does his best to bring a
smile to her lips by his witty remarks; but the girl is
evidently very cool and indifferent with him. At this
moment she is standing away at the side near the piano,
turning over the leaves of some book.
</p>

<p>
This girl is one of those women who create a sensation
amounting almost to amazement when they appear in
society. She is lovely to an almost impossible extent, a
brunette with splendid black eyes, a grand figure and divine
bust. Her shoulders and arms are like an antique statue;
her gait that of an empress. She is a little pale to-day;
but her lips, with the gleam of her pearly teeth between
them, are things to dream of, if you once get a sight of
them. Her expression is severe and serious.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Mosgliakoff is evidently afraid of her intent gaze; at
all events, he seems to cower before her when she looks at
him. She is very simply dressed, in a white muslin frock&mdash;the
white suits her admirably. But then, <emph>everything</emph> suits
her! On her finger is a hair ring: it does not look
as though the hair was her mother's, from the colour.
Mosgliakoff has never dared to ask her whose hair it is.
This morning she seems to be in a peculiarly depressed
humour; she appears to be very much preoccupied and
silent: but her mother is quite ready to talk enough for
both; albeit she glances continually at Zina, as though
anxious for her, but timidly, too, as if afraid of her.
</p>

<p>
<q>I am <emph>so</emph> pleased, Pavel Alexandrovitch,</q> she chirps
to Mosgliakoff; <q rend='pre'><emph>so</emph> happy, that I feel inclined to cry the
news out of the window to every passer-by. Not to speak
of the delightful surprise&mdash;to both Zina and myself&mdash;of
seeing you a whole fortnight sooner than we expected you&mdash;that,
of course, <q>goes without saying</q>; but I am so, <emph>so</emph>
pleased that you should have brought this dear prince with
you. You don't know how I love that fascinating old man.
No, no! You would never believe it. You young people
don't understand this sort of rapture; you never would
believe me, assure you as much as ever I pleased.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't you remember, Zina, how much he was to me at
that time&mdash;six years ago? Why, I was his guide, his sister,
his mother! There was something delightfully ingenuous
and ennobling in our intimacy&mdash;one might say <emph>pastoral</emph>; I
don't know what to call it&mdash;it was delightful. That is why
the poor dear prince thinks of <emph>my</emph> house, and only mine,
with gratitude, now. Do you know, Pavel Alexandrovitch,
perhaps you have <emph>saved</emph> him by thus bringing him to me?
I have thought of him with quaking of heart all these six
years&mdash;you'd hardly believe it,&mdash;and <emph>dreamed</emph> of him, too.
They say that wretch of a woman has bewitched and ruined
him; but you've got him out of the net at last. We must
make the best of our opportunity now, and save him outright.
Do tell me again, how did you manage it? Describe
your meeting and all in detail; I only heard the chief point
of the story just now, and I do so like details. So, he's
still at his toilet table now, is he?&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes. It was all just as I told you, Maria Alexandrovna!</q>
begins Mosgliakoff readily&mdash;delighted to repeat his
story ten times over, if required&mdash;<q>I had driven all night,
and not slept a wink. You can imagine what a hurry I was
in to arrive here,</q> he adds, turning to Zina; <q rend='pre'>in a word, I
swore at the driver, yelled for fresh horses, kicked up a row
at every post station: my adventures would fill a volume.
Well, exactly at six o'clock in the morning I arrived at the
last station, Igishova. <q>Horses, horses!</q> I shouted,
<q>let's have fresh horses quick; I'm not going to get
out.</q> I frightened the post-station man's wife out
of her wits; she had a small baby in her arms, and I
have an idea that its mother's fright will affect said baby's
supply of the needful. Well, the sunrise was splendid&mdash;fine
frosty morning&mdash;lovely! but I hadn't time to look at
anything. I got my horses&mdash;I had to deprive some other
traveller of his pair; he was a professor, and we nearly
fought a duel about it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>They told me some prince had driven off a quarter of an
hour ago. He had slept here, and was driving his own horses;
but I didn't attend to anything. Well, just seven miles from
town, at a turn of the road, I saw that some surprising
event had happened. A huge travelling carriage was lying
on its side; the coachman and two flunkeys stood outside it,
apparently dazed, while from inside the carriage came heart-rending
lamentations and cries. I thought I'd pass by and
let them all be&mdash;; it was no affair of mine: but humanity
insisted, and would not take a denial. (I think it is Heine
says that humanity shoves its nose in everywhere!) So I
stopped; and my driver and myself, with the other fellows,
lifted the carriage on to its legs again, or perhaps I should
say wheels, as it had no legs.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I thought to myself, <q>This is that very prince they mentioned!</q>
So, I looked in. Good Heavens! it was our
prince! Here was a meeting, if you like! I yelled at him,
<q>Prince&mdash;uncle!</q> Of course he hardly knew me at the first
glance, but he very soon recognised me. At least, I don't
believe he knows who I am really, even <emph>now</emph>; I think he
takes me for someone else, not a relation. I saw him last
seven years ago, as a boy; I remember <emph>him</emph>, because he
struck me so; but how was he to remember <emph>me</emph>? At all
events, I told him my name, and he embraced me ecstatically;
and all the while he himself was crying and trembling
with fright. He really was <emph>crying</emph>, I'll take my oath
he was! I saw it with my own eyes.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, we talked a bit, and at last I persuaded him to get
into my trap with me, and call in at Mordasoff, if only for
one day, to rest and compose his feelings. He told me
that Stepanida Matveyevna had had a letter from Moscow,
saying that her father, or daughter, or both, with all her
family, were dying; and that she had wavered for a long
time, and at last determined to go away for ten days. The
prince sat out one day, and then another, and then a third,
measuring wigs, and powdering and pomading himself;
then he grew sick of it, and determined to go and see an
old friend, a priest called Misael, who lived at the Svetozersk
Hermitage. Some of the household, being afraid of the
great Stepanida's wrath, opposed the prince's proposed
journey; but the latter insisted, and started last night after
dinner. He slept at Igishova, and went off this morning
again, at sunrise. Just at the turn going down to the
Reverend Mr. Misael's, the carriage went over, and the
prince was very nearly shot down the ravine.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Then I step in and save the prince, and persuade him to
come and pay a visit to our mutual friend, Maria Alexandrovna
(of whom the prince told me that she is the most
delightful and charming woman he has ever known). And so
here we are, and the prince is now upstairs attending to his
wigs and so on, with the help of his valet, whom he took
along with him, and whom he always would and will take
with him wherever he goes; because he would sooner die
than appear before ladies without certain little secret touches
which require the valet's hand. There you are, that's the
whole story.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, what a humourist he is, isn't he, Zina?</q> said the
lady of the house. "How beautifully you told the story!
Now, listen, Paul: one question; explain to me clearly how
you are related to the prince; you call him uncle!"
</p>

<p>
<q>I really don't know, Maria Alexandrovna; seventh,
cousin I think, or something of that sort. My aunt knows
all about it; it was she who made me go down to see him
at Donchanova, when I got kicked out by Stepanida! I
simply call him <q>uncle,</q> and he answers me; that's about all
our relationship.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, I repeat, it was Providence that made you bring
him straight to my house as you did. I tremble to think of
what might have happened to the poor dear prince if somebody
else, and not I, had got hold of him! Why, they'd
have torn him to pieces among them, and picked his bones!
They'd have pounced on him as on a new-found mine; they
might easily have robbed him; they are capable of it. You
have no idea, Paul, of the depth of meanness and greediness
to which the people of this place have fallen!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But, my dear good Maria Alexandrovna&mdash;as if he would
ever <emph>think</emph> of bringing him anywhere but to yourself,</q> said
the widow, pouring out a cup of tea; <q>you don't suppose
he would have taken the prince to Mrs. Antipova's, surely,
do you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Dear me, how very long he is coming out,</q> said Maria
Alexandrovna, impatiently rising from her chair; <q>it really
is quite strange!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Strange! what, of uncle? Oh dear, no! he'll probably
be another five hours or so putting himself together; besides,
since he has no memory whatever, he has very likely quite
forgotten that he has come to your house! Why, he's a
most extraordinary man, Maria Alexandrovna.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh don't, don't! Don't talk like that!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why not, Maria Alexandrovna? He is a lump of
composition, not a man at all! Remember, you haven't
seen him for six years, and I saw him half an hour ago.
He is half a corpse; he's only the memory of a man; they've
forgotten to bury him! Why, his eye is made of glass, and
his leg of cork, and he goes on wires; he even talks on
wires!</q>
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna's face took a serious expression.
<q>What nonsense you talk,</q> she said; <q>and aren't you
ashamed of yourself, you, a young man and a relation too&mdash;to
talk like that of a most honourable old nobleman! not
to mention his incomparable personal goodness and kindness</q>
(her voice here trembled with emotion). <q>He is a
relic, a chip, so to speak, of our old aristocracy. I know,
my dear young friend, that all this flightiness on your part,
proceeds from those 'new ideas' of which you are so fond
of talking; but, goodness me, I've seen a good deal more of
life than you have: I'm a mother; and though I see the
greatness and nobleness, if you like, of these <q>new ideas,</q>
yet I can understand the practical side of things too! Now,
this gentleman is an old man, and that is quite enough to
render him ridiculous in your eyes. You, who talk of
emancipating your serfs, and <q>doing something for posterity,</q>
indeed! I tell you what it is, it's your Shakespeare!
You stuff yourself full of Shakespeare, who has long ago
outlived his time, my dear Paul; and who, if he lived now,
with all his wisdom, would never make head or tail of our
way of life!</q>
</p>


<p>
<q>If there be any chivalry left in our modern society, it is
only in the highest circles of the aristocracy. A prince is a
prince either in a hovel or in a palace! <emph>You</emph> are more or
less a representative of the highest circles; your extraction
is aristocratic. I, too, am not altogether a stranger to the
upper ten, and it's a bad fledgling that fouls its own nest!
However, my dear Paul, you'll forget your Shakespeare yet,
and you'll understand all this much better than I can explain
it. I foresee it! Besides, I'm sure you are only
joking; you did not mean what you said. Stay here, dear
Paul, will you? I'm just going upstairs to make inquiries
after the prince, he may want something.</q> And Maria Alexandrovna
left the room hurriedly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Maria Alexandrovna seems highly delighted that Mrs.
Antipova, who thinks so much of herself, did not get hold
of the prince!</q> remarked the widow; <q>Mrs. Antipova must
be gnashing her teeth with annoyance just now! She's a
relation, too, as I've been pointing out to Maria Alexandrovna.</q>
</p>

<p>
Observing that no one answered her, and casting her eyes
on Zina and Mosgliakoff, the widow suddenly recollected
herself, and discreetly left the room, as though to fetch
something. However, she rewarded herself for her discretion,
by putting her ear to the keyhole, as soon as she had
closed the door after her.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Alexandrovitch immediately turned to Zina. He
was in a state of great agitation; his voice shook.
</p>

<p>
<q>Zenaida Afanassievna, are you angry with me?</q> he
began, in a timid, beseechful tone.
</p>

<p>
<q>With you? Why?</q> asked Zina, blushing a little, and
raising her magnificent eyes to his face.
</p>

<p>
<q>For coming earlier. I couldn't help it; I couldn't wait
another fortnight; I dreamed of you every night; so I flew
off to learn my fate. But you are frowning, you are angry;&mdash;oh;
am I really not to hear anything definite, even now?</q>
</p>

<p>
Zina distinctly and decidedly frowned.
</p>

<p>
<q>I supposed you would speak of this,</q> she said, with her
eyes drooped again, but with a firm and severe voice, in
which some annoyance was perceptible; <q>and as the expectation
of it was very tedious, the sooner you had your
say, the better! You insist upon an answer again, do you?
Very well, I say <emph>wait</emph>, just as I said it before. I now repeat,
as I did then, that I have not as yet decided, and cannot
therefore promise to be your wife. You cannot force a girl
to such a decision, Pavel Alexandrovitch! However, to
relieve your mind, I will add, that I do not as yet refuse
you absolutely; and pray observe that I give you thus much
hope of a favourable reply, merely out of forced deference
to your impatience and agitation; and that if I think fit afterwards
to reject you altogether, you are not to blame me for
having given you false hopes. So now you know.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, but&mdash;but&mdash;what's the use of that? What hope am
I to get out of that, Zina?</q> cried Mosgliakoff in piteous
tones.
</p>

<p>
<q>Recollect what I have said, and draw whatever you
please from the words; that's your business. I shall add
nothing. I do not refuse you; I merely say&mdash;wait! And I
repeat, I reserve the free right of rejecting you afterwards
if I choose so to do. Just one more word: if you come
here before the fixed time relying on outside protection, or
even on my mother's influence to help you gain your end,
let me tell you, you make a great mistake; if you worry me
now, I shall refuse you outright. I hope we understand
each other now, and that I shall hear no more of this, until
the period I named to you for my decision.</q> All this was
said quietly and drily, and without a pause, as if learnt by
rote. Paul felt foolish; but just at this moment Maria
Alexandrovna entered the room, and the widow after her.
</p>

<p>
<q>I think he's just coming, Zina! Nastasia Petrovna, make
some new tea quick, please!</q> The good lady was considerably
agitated.
</p>

<p>
<q>Mrs. Antipova has sent her maid over to inquire about
the prince already. How angry she must be feeling just
now,</q> remarked the widow, as she commenced to pass over
the tea-urn.
</p>

<p>
<q>And what's that to me!</q> replied Maria Alexandrovna, over
her shoulder. <q rend='pre'>Just as though <emph>I</emph> care what she thinks! <emph>I</emph> shall
not send a maid to her kitchen to inquire, I assure you! And
I am surprised, downright <emph>surprised</emph>, that, not only you, but
all the town, too, should suppose that that wretched woman
is my enemy! I appeal to you, Paul&mdash;you know us both.
Why should I be her enemy, now? Is it a question of precedence?
Pooh! I don't care about precedence! She may
be first, if she likes, and I shall be readiest of all to go and
congratulate her on the fact. Besides, it's all nonsense!
Why, I take her part; I <emph>must</emph> take her part. People malign
her; <emph>why</emph> do you all fall upon her so? Because she's young,
and likes to be smart; is that it? Dear me, I think finery
is a good bit better than some other failings&mdash;like Natalia
Dimitrievna's, for instance, who has a taste for things that
cannot be mentioned in polite society. Or is it that Mrs.
Antipova goes out too much, and never stays at home?
My goodness! why, the woman has never had any education;
naturally she doesn't care to sit down to read, or anything
of that sort. True, she coquets and makes eyes at everybody
who looks at her. But why do people tell her that
she's pretty? especially as she only has a pale face, and
nothing else to boast of.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>She is amusing at a dance, I admit; but why do people
tell her that she dances the polka so well? She wears
hideous hats and things; but it's not her fault that nature
gave her no gift of good taste. She talks scandal; but that's
the custom of the place&mdash;who doesn't here? That fellow,
Sushikoff, with his whiskers, goes to see her pretty often
while her husband plays cards, but that <emph>may</emph> be merely a
trumped-up tale; at all events I always say so, and take her
part in every way! But, good heavens! here's the prince at
last! 'Tis he, 'tis he! I recognise him! I should know
him out of a thousand! At last I see you! At last, my
Prince!</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna,&mdash;and she rushed to
greet the prince as he entered the room.
</p>


</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER IV.</head>

<p>
At first sight you would not take this prince for an old man
at all, and it is only when you come near and take a good
look at him, that you see he is merely a dead man working
on wires. All the resources of science are brought to bear
upon this mummy, in order to give it the appearance of life
and youth. A marvellous wig, glorious whiskers, moustache
and napoleon&mdash;all of the most raven black&mdash;cover half his
face. He is painted and powdered with very great skill, so
much so that one can hardly detect any wrinkles. What has
become of them, goodness only knows.
</p>

<p>
He is dressed in the pink of fashion, just as though he
had walked straight out of a tailor's fashion-page. His coat,
his gloves, tie, his waistcoat, his linen, are all in perfect
taste, and in the very last mode. The prince limps slightly,
but so slightly that one would suppose he did it on purpose
because <emph>that</emph> was in fashion too. In his eye he wears a glass&mdash;in
the eye which is itself glass already.
</p>

<p>
He was soaked with scent. His speech and manner of
pronouncing certain syllables was full of affectation; and
this was, perhaps, all that he retained of the mannerisms
and tricks of his younger days. For if the prince had not
quite lost his wits as yet, he had certainly parted with nearly
every vestige of his memory, which&mdash;alas!&mdash;is a thing which
no amount of perfumeries and wigs and rouge and tight-lacing
will renovate. He continually forgets words in the midst of
conversation, and loses his way, which makes it a matter of
some difficulty to carry on a conversation with him. However,
Maria Alexandrovna has confidence in her inborn
dexterity, and at sight of the prince she flies into a condition
of unspeakable rapture.
</p>


<p>
<q>Oh! but you've not changed, you've not changed a <emph>bit</emph>!</q>
she cries, seizing her guest by both hands, and popping him
into a comfortable arm-chair. <q>Sit down, dear Prince, do
sit down! Six years, prince, six whole long years since we
saw each other, and not a letter, not a little tiny scrap of
a note all the while. <emph>Oh</emph>, how naughty you have been,
prince! And <emph>how</emph> angry I have been with you, my dear
friend! But, tea! tea! Good Heavens, Nastasia Petrovna,
tea for the prince, quick!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Th&mdash;thanks, thanks; I'm very s&mdash;orry!</q> stammered the
old man (I forgot to mention that he stammered a little, but
he did even this as though it were the fashion to do it).
<q>Very s&mdash;sorry; fancy, I&mdash;I wanted to co&mdash;come last year,
but they t&mdash;told me there was cho&mdash;cho&mdash;cholera here.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There was foot and mouth disease here, uncle,</q> put in
Mosgliakoff, by way of distinguishing himself. Maria Alexandrovna
gave him a severe look.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, foot and mouth disease, or something of that
s&mdash;sort,</q> said the prince; <q>so I st&mdash;stayed at home. Well,
and how's your h&mdash;husband, my dear Anna Nic&mdash;Nicolaevna?
Still at his proc&mdash;procuror's work?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, prince!</q> said Maria Alexandrovna, a little disconcerted.
<q>My husband is not a procurer.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I'll bet anything that uncle has mixed you up with Anna
Nicolaevna Antipova,</q> said Mosgliakoff, but stopped suddenly
on observing the look on Maria Alexandrovna's face.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, of course, Anna Nicolaevna. A&mdash;An. What
the deuce! I'm always f&mdash;forgetting; Antipova, Antipova,
of course,</q> continued the prince.
</p>

<p>
<q>No, prince, you have made a great mistake,</q> remarked
Maria Alexandrovna, with a bitter smile. <q>I am not Anna
Nicolaevna at all, and I confess I should never have believed
that you would not recognise me. You have astonished
me, prince. I am your old friend, Maria Alexandrovna
Moskaloff. Don't you remember Maria Alexandrovna?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>M&mdash;Maria Alexandrovna! think of that; and I thought
she was w&mdash;what's her name. Y&mdash;yes, Anna Vasilievna!
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>C'est d&#233;licieux.</foreign> W&mdash;why I thought you were going to take me
to this A&mdash;Anna Matveyevna. Dear me! <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>C'est ch&mdash;charmant!</foreign>
It often happens so w&mdash;with me. I get taken to the wrong
house; but I'm v&mdash;very pleased, v&mdash;very pleased! So you're
not Nastasia Va&mdash;silievna? How interesting.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I'm Maria Alexandrovna, prince; <emph>Maria Alexandrovna</emph>!
Oh! how naughty you are, Prince, to forget your best, best
friend!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;es! ye&mdash;yes! best friend; best friend, for&mdash;forgive
me!</q> stammered the old man, staring at Zina.
</p>

<p>
<q>That's my daughter Zina. You are not acquainted yet,
prince. She wasn't here when you were last in the town,
in the year &mdash;&mdash; you know.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, th&mdash;this is your d&mdash;daughter!</q> muttered the old
man, staring hungrily at Zina through his glasses. <q>Dear me,
dear me. <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Ch&mdash;charmante, ch&mdash;armante!</foreign> But what a
lo&mdash;ovely girl,</q> he added, evidently impressed.
</p>

<p>
<q>Tea! prince,</q> remarked Maria Alexandrovna, directing
his attention to the page standing before him with the tray.
The prince took a cup, and examined the boy, who had a
nice fresh face of his own.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah! this is your l&mdash;little boy? Wh&mdash;what a charming
little b&mdash;boy! and does he be&mdash;behave nicely?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But, prince,</q> interrupted Maria Alexandrovna, impatiently,
<q>what is this dreadful occurrence I hear of? I
confess I was nearly beside myself with terror when I heard
of it. Were you not hurt at all? <emph>Do</emph> take care. One
cannot make light of this sort of thing.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Upset, upset; the c&mdash;coachman upset me!</q> cried the
prince, with unwonted vivacity. <q>I thought it was the end
of the world, and I was fri&mdash;frightened out of my wits. I
didn't expect it; I didn't, indeed! and my co&mdash;oachman is
to blame for it all. I trust you, my friend, to lo&mdash;ok into
the matter well. I feel sure he was making an attempt on
my life!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>All right, all right, uncle,</q> said Paul; <q>I'll see about it.
But look here&mdash;forgive him, just this once, uncle; just this
once, won't you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>N&mdash;not I! Not for anything! I'm sure he wants my
life, he and Lavrenty too. It's&mdash;it's the 'new ideas;' it's
Com&mdash;Communism, in the fullest sense of the word. I
daren't meet them anywhere.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You are right, you are quite right, prince,</q> cried Maria
Alexandrovna. <q>You don't know how I suffer myself from
these wretched people. I've just been obliged to change two
of my servants; and you've no idea how <emph>stupid</emph> they are,
prince.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes! quite so!</q> said the prince, delighted&mdash;as all
old men are whose senile chatter is listened to with servility.
<q>But I like a fl&mdash;flunky to look stupid; it gives them
presence. There's my Terenty, now. You remember
Terenty, my friend? Well, the f&mdash;first time I ever looked at
him I said, <q>You shall be my ha&mdash;hall porter.</q> He's stupid,
phen&mdash;phen&mdash;omenally stupid, he looks like a she&mdash;sheep;
but his dig&mdash;dignity and majesty are wonderful. When I look
at him he seems to be composing some l&mdash;learned dis&mdash;sertation.
He's just like the German philosopher, Kant,
or like some fa&mdash;fat old turkey, and that's just what one
wants in a serving-man.</q>
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna laughed, and clapped her hands in
the highest state of ecstasy; Paul supported her with all his
might; Nastasia Petrovna laughed too; and even Zina
smiled.
</p>

<p>
<q>But, prince, how clever, how witty, how <emph>humorous</emph> you
are!</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna. <q>What a wonderful gilt
of remarking the smallest refinements of character. And for
a man like you to eschew all society, and shut yourself up
for five years! With such talents! Why, prince, you could
<emph>write</emph>, you could be an author. You could emulate Von
Vezin, Gribojedoff, Gogol!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes! ye&mdash;yes!</q> said the delighted prince. <q>I can
reproduce things I see, very well. And, do you know, I
used to be a very wi&mdash;witty fellow indeed, some time ago.
I even wrote a play once. There were some very smart
couplets, I remember; but it was never acted.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! how nice it would be to read it over, especially
just <emph>now</emph>, eh, Zina? for we are thinking of getting up a
play, you must know, prince, for the benefit of the <q>martyrs
of the Fatherland,</q> the wounded soldiers. There, now,
how handy your play would come in!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Certainly, certainly. I&mdash;I would even write you another.
I think I've quite forgotten the old one. I remember there
were two or three such epigrams that (here the prince
kissed his own hand to convey an idea of the exquisite wit
of his lines) I recollect when I was abroad I made a real
furore. I remember Lord Byron well; we were great friends;
you should have seen him dance the mazurka one day during
the Vienna Congress.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Lord Byron, uncle?&mdash;Surely not!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ye&mdash;yes, Lord Byron. Perhaps it was not Lord Byron,
though, perhaps it was someone else; no, it wasn't Lord
Byron, it was some Pole; I remember now. A won&mdash;der-ful
fellow that Pole was! He said he was a C&mdash;Count,
and he turned out to be a c&mdash;cook&mdash;shop man! But he
danced the mazurka won&mdash;der&mdash;fully, and broke his leg at
last. I recollect I wrote some lines at the time:&mdash;</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Our little Pole</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>Danced like blazes.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<q rend='post'>&mdash;How did it go on, now? Wait a minute! No, I can't
remember.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I'll tell you, uncle. It must have been like this,</q> said
Paul, becoming more and more inspired:&mdash;
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>But he tripped in a hole,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>Which stopped his crazes.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, that was it, I think, or something very like it. I
don't know, though&mdash;perhaps it wasn't. Anyhow, the lines
were very sm&mdash;art. I forget a good deal of what I have seen
and done. I'm so b&mdash;busy now!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But do let me hear how you have employed your time
in your solitude, dear prince,</q> said Maria Alexandrovna.
<q>I must confess that I have thought of you so often, and
often, that I am burning with impatience to hear more
about you and your doings.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Employed my time? Oh, very busy; very busy,
ge&mdash;generally. One rests, you see, part of the day; and
then I imagine a good many things.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I should think you have a very strong imagination,
haven't you, uncle?</q> remarked Paul.
</p>

<p>
<q>Exceptionally so, my dear fellow. I sometimes
imagine things which amaze even myself! When I was at
Kadueff,&mdash;by-the-by, you were vice-governor of Kadueff,
weren't you?</q>
</p>


<p>
<q>I, uncle! Why, what are you thinking of?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No? Just fancy, my dear fellow! and I've been thinking
all this time how f&mdash;funny that the vice-governor of
Kadueff should be here with quite a different face: he had
a fine intelligent, dig&mdash;dignified face, you know. A wo&mdash;wonderful
fellow! Always writing verses, too; he was rather
like the Ki&mdash;King of Diamonds from the side view, but&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, prince,</q> interrupted Maria Alexandrovna. <q>I
assure you, you'll ruin yourself with the life you are leading!
To make a hermit of oneself for five years, and see no one,
and hear no one: you're a lost man, dear prince! Ask
any one of those who love you, they'll all tell you the same;
you're a lost man!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No,</q> cried the prince, <q>really?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, I assure you of it! I am speaking to you as a
sister&mdash;as a friend! I am telling you this because you are
very dear to me, and because the memory of the past is
sacred to me. No, no! You must change your way of
living; otherwise you will fall ill, and break up, and die!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Gracious heavens! Surely I shan't d&mdash;die so soon?</q>
cried the old man. <q>You&mdash;you are right about being ill;
I am ill now and then. I'll tell you all the sy&mdash;symptoms!
I'll de&mdash;detail them to you. Firstly I&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Uncle, don't you think you had better tell us all about
it another day?</q> Paul interrupted hurriedly. <q>I think we
had better be starting just now, don't you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes&mdash;yes, perhaps, perhaps. But remind me to tell you
another time; it's a most interesting case, I assure you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But listen, my dear prince!</q> Maria Alexandrovna
resumed, <q>why don't you try being doctored abroad?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ab&mdash;road? Yes, yes&mdash;I shall certainly go abroad. I
remember when I was abroad, about '20; it was delightfully
g&mdash;gay and jolly. I very nearly married a vi&mdash;viscountess, a
French woman. I was fearfully in love, but som&mdash;somebody
else married her, not I. It was a very s&mdash;strange thing. I
had only gone away for a coup&mdash;couple of hours, and this
Ger&mdash;German baron fellow came and carried her off! He
went into a ma&mdash;madhouse afterwards!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, dear prince, you must look after your health.
There are such good doctors abroad; and&mdash;besides, the
mere change of life, what will not that alone do for you!
You <emph>must</emph> desert your dear Donchanovo, if only for a time!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>C&mdash;certainly, certainly! I've long meant to do it.
I'm going to try hy&mdash;hydropathy!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Hydropathy?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes. I've tried it once before: I was abroad, you
know, and they persuaded me to try drinking the wa&mdash;waters.
There wasn't anything the matter with me, but I agreed,
just out of deli&mdash;delicacy for their feelings; and I did
seem to feel easier, somehow. So I drank, and drank, and
dra&mdash;ank up a whole waterfall; and I assure you if I hadn't
fallen ill just then I should have been quite well, th&mdash;thanks
to the water! But, I confess, you've frightened me
so about these ma&mdash;maladies and things, I feel quite put
out. I'll come back d&mdash;directly!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, prince, where are you off to?</q> asked Maria
Alexandrovna in surprise.
</p>

<p>
<q>Directly, directly. I'm just going to note down an
i&mdash;idea!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What sort of idea?</q> cried Paul, bursting with laughter.
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna lost all patience.
</p>

<p>
<q>I cannot understand what you find to laugh at!</q> she
cried, as the old man disappeared; <q>to laugh at an
honourable old man, and turn every word of his into
ridicule&mdash;presuming on his angelic good nature. I assure
you I <emph>blushed</emph> for you, Paul Alexandrovitch! Why, what
do you see in him to laugh at? I never saw anything
funny about him!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, I laugh because he does not recognise people,
and talks such nonsense!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That's simply the result of his sad life, of his dreadful
five years' captivity, under the guardianship of that she-devil!
You should <emph>pity</emph>, not laugh at him! He did not
even know <emph>me</emph>; you saw it yourself. I tell you it's a crying
shame; he must be saved, at all costs! I recommend him
to go abroad so that he may get out of the clutches of that&mdash;beast
of a woman!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you know what&mdash;we must find him a wife!</q> cried Paul.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, Mr. Mosgliakoff, you are too bad; you really are
too bad!</q>
</p>


<p>
<q>No, no, Maria Alexandrovna; I assure you, this time
I'm speaking in all seriousness. Why <emph>not</emph> marry him off?
Isn't it rather a brilliant idea? What harm can marriage
do him? On the contrary, he is in that position that such a
step alone can save him! In the first place, he will get rid
of that fox of a woman; and, secondly, he may find some
girl, or better still some widow&mdash;kind, good, wise and gentle,
and poor, who will look after him as his own daughter
would, and who will be sensible of the honour he does her
in making her his wife! And what could be better for the
old fellow than to have such a person about him, rather
than the&mdash;woman he has now? Of course she must be
nice-looking, for uncle appreciates good looks; didn't
you observe how he stared at Miss Zina?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But how will you find him such a bride?</q> asked Nastasia
Petrovna, who had listened intently to Paul's suggestion.
</p>

<p>
<q>What a question! Why, you yourself, if you pleased!
and why not, pray? In the first place, you are good-looking,
you are a widow, you are generous, you are poor (at
least I don't think you are very rich). Then you are a
very reasonable woman: you'll learn to love him, and take
good care of him; you'll send that other woman to the
deuce, and take your husband abroad, where you will feed
him on pudding and lollipops till the moment of his
quitting this wicked world, which will be in about a year, or
in a couple of months perhaps. After that, you emerge a
princess, a rich widow, and, as a prize for your goodness
to the old gentleman, you'll marry a fine young marquis, or
a governor-general, or somebody of the sort! There&mdash;that's
a pretty enough prospect, isn't it?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Tfu! Goodness me! I should fall in love with him
at once, out of pure gratitude, if he only proposed to me!</q>
said the widow, with her black eyes all ablaze; <q>but, of
course, it's all nonsense!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nonsense, is it? Shall I make it sound sense, then, for
you? Ask me prettily, and if I don't make you his
betrothed by this evening, you may cut my little finger off!
Why, there's nothing in the world easier than to talk uncle
into anything you please! He'll only say, <q>Ye&mdash;yes,
ye&mdash;yes,</q> just as you heard him now! We'll marry him so
that he doesn't know anything about it, if you like? We'll
deceive him and marry him, if you please! Any way you
like, it can be done! Why, it's for his own good; it's out of
pity for himself! Don't you think, seriously, Nastasia
Petrovna, that you had better put on some smart clothes in
any case?</q>
</p>

<p>
Paul's enthusiasm amounted by now to something like
madness, while the widow's mouth watered at his idea, in
spite of her better judgment.
</p>

<p>
<q>I know, I know I look horridly untidy!</q> she said.
<q>I go about anyhow, nowadays! There's nothing to dress
for. Do I really look like a regular cook?</q>
</p>

<p>
All this time Maria Alexandrovna sat still, with a strange
expression on her face. I shall not be far wrong if I say
that she listened to Paul's wild suggestion with a look of
terror, almost: she was confused and startled; at last she
recollected herself, and spoke.
</p>

<p>
<q>All this is very nice, of course; but at the same time it
is utter nonsense, and perfectly out of the question!</q> she
observed cuttingly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, why, my good Maria Alexandrovna? Why is it
such nonsense, or why out of the question?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>For many reasons; and, principally because you are,
as the prince is also, a guest in my house; and I cannot
permit anyone to forget their respect towards my establishment!
I shall consider your words as a joke, Paul
Alexandrovitch, and nothing more! Here comes the
prince&mdash;thank goodness!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Here I am!</q> cried the old man as he entered. <q>It's
a wo&mdash;wonderful thing how many good ideas of all
s&mdash;sorts I'm having to-day! and another day I may spend
the whole of it without a single one! As&mdash;tonishing? not
one all day!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Probably the result of your accident, to-day, uncle!
Your nerves got shaken up, you see, and &mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, I think so, I think so too; and I look on the
accident as pro&mdash;fitable, on the whole; and therefore I'm
going to excuse the coachman. I don't think it was an
at&mdash;tempt on my life, after all, do you? Besides, he was
punished a little while a&mdash;go, when his beard was sh&mdash;shaved
off!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Beard shaved off? Why, uncle, his beard is as big as
a German state!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, a German state, you are very happy in your
ex&mdash;pressions, my boy! but it's a fa&mdash;false one. Fancy
what happened: I sent for a price-current for false hair and
beards, and found advertisements for splendid ser&mdash;vants'
and coachmen's beards, very cheap&mdash;extraordinarily so!
I sent for one, and it certainly was a be&mdash;auty. But when
we wanted to clap it on the coachman, we found he had
one of his own t&mdash;twice as big; so I thought, shall I cut
off his, or let him wear it, and send this one b&mdash;back? and
I decided to shave his off, and let him wear the f&mdash;false one!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>On the theory that art is higher than nature, I suppose
uncle?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, yes! Just so&mdash;and I assure you, when we cut off
his beard he suffered as much as though we were depriving
him of all he held most dear! But we must be go&mdash;going,
my boy!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But I hope, dear prince, that you will only call upon the
governor!</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna, in great agitation.
<q>You are <emph>mine</emph> now, Prince; you belong to <emph>my</emph> family for
the whole of this day! Of course I will say nothing about
the society of this place. Perhaps you are thinking of
paying Anna Nicolaevna a visit? I will not say a word to
dissuade you; but at the same time I am quite convinced
that&mdash;time will show! Remember one thing, dear Prince,
that I am your sister, your nurse, your guardian for to-day
at least, and oh!&mdash;I tremble for you. You don't know these
people, Prince, as I do! You don't know them fully: but
time will teach you all you do not know.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Trust me, Maria Alexandrovna!</q> said Paul, <q>it shall
all be exactly as I have promised you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh&mdash;but you're such a weathercock! I can never
trust <emph>you</emph>! I shall wait for you at dinner time, Prince; we
dine early. How sorry I am that my husband happens to
be in the country on such an occasion! How happy he would
have been to see you! He esteems you so highly, Prince;
he is so sincerely attached to you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Your husband? dear me! So you have a h&mdash;husband,
too!</q> observed the old man.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, prince, prince! how forgetful you are! Why, you
have <emph>quite</emph>, quite forgotten the past! My husband, Afanassy
Matveyevitch, surely you must remember him? He is in
the country: but you have seen him thousands of times
before! Don't you remember&mdash;Afanassy Matveyevitch!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Afanassy Matveyevitch. Dear me!&mdash;and in the co&mdash;country!
how very charming! So you have a husband!
dear me, I remember a vaudeville very like that, something
about&mdash;</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l rend="text-align: center"><q rend='pre'>The husband's here,</q></l>
<l rend="text-align: center"><q rend='post'>And his wife at Tvere.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<q rend='post'>Charming, charming&mdash;such a good rhyme too; and it's a
most ri&mdash;diculous story! Charming, charming; the wife's
away, you know, at Jaroslaf or Tv&mdash;&mdash; or somewhere, and the
husband is&mdash;&mdash;is&mdash;&mdash;Dear me! I'm afraid I've forgotten
what we were talking about! Yes, yes&mdash;we must be
going, my boy! <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Au revoir, madame; adieu, ma charmante
demoiselle</foreign></q> he added, turning to Zina, and putting the ends
of her fingers to his lips.
</p>

<p>
<q>Come back to dinner,&mdash;to dinner, prince! don't forget
to come back here quick!</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna after
them as they went out; <q>be back to dinner!</q>
</p>


</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER V.</head>

<p>
<q>Nastasia Petrovna, I think you had better go and see
what is doing in the kitchen!</q> observed Maria Alexandrovna,
as she returned from seeing the prince off. <q>I'm
sure that rascal Nikitka will spoil the dinner! Probably he's
drunk already!</q> The widow obeyed.
</p>

<p>
As the latter left the room, she glanced suspiciously at
Maria Alexandrovna, and observed that the latter was in a
high state of agitation. Therefore, instead of going to
look after Nikitka, she went through the <q>Salon,</q> along
the passage to her own room, and through that to a dark
box-room, where the old clothes of the establishment and
such things were stored. There she approached the locked
door on tiptoe; and stifling her breath, she bent to the keyhole,
through which she peeped, and settled herself to listen
intently. This door, which was always kept shut, was one
of the three doors communicating with the room where
Maria Alexandrovna and Zina were now left alone. Maria
Alexandrovna always considered Nastasia an untrustworthy
sort of woman, although extremely silly into the
bargain. Of course she had suspected the widow&mdash;more
than once&mdash;of eavesdropping; but it so happened that
at the moment Madame Moskaleva was too agitated and
excited to think of the usual precautions.
</p>

<p>
She was sitting in her arm-chair and gazing at Zina.
Zina felt that her mother was looking at her, and was conscious
of an unpleasant sensation at her heart.
</p>

<p>
<q>Zina!</q>
</p>

<p>
Zina slowly turned her head towards the speaker, and
lifted her splendid dark eyes to hers.
</p>

<p>
<q>Zina, I wish to speak to you on a most important
matter!</q>
</p>

<p>
Zina adopted an attentive air, and sat still with folded
hands, waiting for light. In her face there was an expression
of annoyance as well as irony, which she did her best to
hide.
</p>

<p>
<q>I wish to ask you first, Zina, what you thought of
<emph>that</emph> Mosgliakoff, to-day?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You have known my opinion of him for a long time!</q>
replied Zina, surlily.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, yes, of course! but I think he is getting just a
little <emph>too</emph> troublesome, with his continual bothering you&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, but he says he is in love with me, in which case his
importunity is pardonable!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Strange! You used not to be so ready to find his
offences pardonable; you used to fly out at him if ever I
mentioned his name!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Strange, too, that you always defended him, and were
so very anxious that I should marry him!&mdash;and now you
are the first to attack him!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes; I don't deny, Zina, that I did wish, then, to see
you married to Mosgliakoff! It was painful to me to witness
your continual grief, your sufferings, which I can well
realize&mdash;whatever you may think to the contrary!&mdash;and
which deprived me of my rest at night! I determined at
last that there was but one great change of life that would
ever save you from the sorrows of the past, and that change
was matrimony! We are not rich; we cannot afford to go
abroad. All the asses in the place prick their long ears,
and wonder that you should be unmarried at twenty-three
years old; and they must needs invent all sorts of stories to
account for the fact! As if I would marry you to one of
our wretched little town councillors, or to Ivan Ivanovitch,
the family lawyer! There are no husbands for <emph>you</emph> in this
place, Zina! Of course Paul Mosgliakoff is a silly sort of
a fellow, but he is better than these people here: he is fairly
born, at least, and he has 150 serfs and landed property, all
of which is better than living by bribes and corruption, and
goodness knows what jobbery besides, as these do! and that
is why I allowed my eyes to rest on him. But I give you
my solemn word, I never had any real sympathy for him!
and if Providence has sent you someone better now, oh,
my dear girl, how fortunate that you have not given your
word to Mosgliakoff! You didn't tell him anything for
certain to-day, did you, Zina?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What is the use of beating about the bush, when the
whole thing lies in a couple of words?</q> said Zina, with
some show of annoyance.
</p>

<p>
<q>Beating about the bush, Zina? Is that the way to
speak to your mother? But what am I? You have long
ceased to trust to your poor mother! You have long looked
upon me as your enemy, and not as your mother at all!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, come mother! you and I are beyond quarrelling
about an expression! Surely we understand one another
by now? It is about time we did, anyhow!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But you offend me, my child! you will not believe that
I am ready to devote <emph>all, all</emph> I can give, in order to establish
your destiny on a safe and happy footing!</q>
</p>

<p>
Zina looked angrily and sarcastically at her mother.
</p>

<p>
<q>Would not you like to marry me to this old prince,
now, in order to establish my destiny on a safe and happy
footing?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have not said a word about it; but, as you mention
the fact, I will say that if you <emph>were</emph> to marry the prince it
would be a very happy thing for you, and&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! Well, I consider the idea utter nonsense!</q> cried
the girl passionately. <q>Nonsense, humbug! and what's
more, I think you have a good deal too much poetical
inspiration, mamma; you are a woman poet in the fullest
sense of the term, and they call you by that name here! You
are always full of projects; and the impracticability and
absurdity of your ideas does not in the least discourage you.
I felt, when the prince was sitting here, that you had that
notion in your head. When Mosgliakoff was talking nonsense
there about marrying the old man to somebody I
read all your thoughts in your face. I am ready to bet any
money that you are thinking of it now, and that you have
come to me now about this very question! However, as
your perpetual projects on my behalf are beginning to
weary me to death, I must beg you not to say one word
about it, not <emph>one word</emph>, mamma; do you hear me? <emph>not one
word</emph>; and I beg you will remember what I say!</q> She
was panting with rage.
</p>

<p>
<q>You are a child, Zina; a poor sorrow-worn, sick child!</q>
said Maria Alexandrovna in tearful accents. <q>You speak
to your poor mother disrespectfully; you wound me deeply,
my dear; there is not another mother in the world who
would have borne what I have to bear from you every day!
But you are suffering, you are sick, you are sorrowful, and I
am your mother, and, first of all, I am a Christian woman!
I must bear it all, and forgive it. But one word, Zina: if I
had really thought of the union you suggest, why would you
consider it so impracticable and absurd? In my opinion,
Mosgliakoff has never said a wiser thing than he did to-day,
when he declared that marriage was what alone could save
the prince,&mdash;not, of course, marriage with that slovenly slut,
Nastasia; there he certainly <emph>did</emph> make a fool of himself!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Now look here, mamma; do you ask me this out of
pure curiosity, or with design? Tell me the truth.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>All I ask is, why does it appear to you to be so
absurd?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Good heavens, mother, you'll drive me wild! What a
fate!</q> cried Zina, stamping her foot with impatience. <q>I'll
tell you why, if you can't see for yourself. Not to mention
all the other evident absurdities of the plan, to take advantage
of the weakened wits of a poor old man, and deceive
him and marry him&mdash;an old cripple, in order to get hold of
his money,&mdash;and then every day and every hour to wish
for his death, is, in my opinion, not only nonsense, but so
mean, <emph>so</emph> mean, mamma, that I&mdash;I can't congratulate you
on your brilliant idea; that's all I can say!</q>
</p>

<p>
There was silence for one minute.
</p>

<p>
<q>Zina, do you remember all that happened two years
ago?</q> asked Maria Alexandrovna of a sudden.
</p>

<p>
Zina trembled.
</p>

<p>
<q>Mamma!</q> she said, severely, <q>you promised me
solemnly never to mention that again.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And I ask you now, as solemnly, my dear child, to
allow me to break that promise, just once! I have never
broken it before. Zina! the time has come for a full and
clear understanding between us! These two years of
silence have been terrible. We cannot go on like this. I
am ready to pray you, on my knees, to let me speak. Listen,
Zina, your own mother who bore you beseeches you, on
her knees! And I promise you faithfully, Zina, and
solemnly, on the word of an unhappy but adoring mother,
that never, under any circumstances, not even to save my
life, will I ever mention the subject again. This shall be
the last time, but it is absolutely necessary!</q>
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna counted upon the effect of her
words, and with reason:
</p>

<p>
<q>Speak, then!</q> said Zina, growing whiter every moment.
</p>

<p>
<q>Thank you, Zina!&mdash;&mdash;Two years ago there came
to the house, to teach your little brother Mitya, since dead, a
tutor&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why do you begin so solemnly, mamma? Why all this
eloquence, all these quite unnecessary details, which are
painful to me, and only too well known to both of us?</q>
cried Zina with a sort of irritated disgust.
</p>

<p>
<q>Because, my dear child, I, your mother, felt in some
degree bound to justify myself before you; and also because
I wish to present this whole question to you from an entirely
new point of view, and not from that mistaken position
which you are accustomed to take up with regard to it;
and because, lastly, I think you will thus better understand
the conclusion at which I shall arrive upon the whole
question. Do not think, dear child, that I wish to trifle
with your heart! No, Zina, you will find in me a real
mother; and perhaps, with tears streaming from your eyes,
you will ask and beseech at my feet&mdash;at the feet of the
'<emph>mean woman</emph>,' as you have just called me,&mdash;yes, and pray
for that reconciliation which you have rejected so long!
That's why I wish to recall all, Zina, <emph>all</emph> that has happened,
from the very beginning; and without this I shall not speak
at all!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Speak, then!</q> repeated Zina, cursing the necessity for
her mother's eloquence from the very bottom of her
heart.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I continue then, Zina!&mdash;&mdash;This tutor, a master of
the parish school, almost a boy, makes upon you what is, to
me, a totally inexplicable impression. I built too much upon
my confidence in your good sense, or your noble pride, and
principally upon the fact of his insignificance&mdash;(I must
speak out!)&mdash;to allow myself to harbour the slightest suspicion
of you! And then you suddenly come to me, one fine day,
and state that you intend to marry the man! Zina, it was
putting a knife to my heart! I gave a shriek and lost consciousness.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But of course you remember all this. Of course I
thought it my duty to use all my power over you, which
power you called tyranny. Think for yourself&mdash;a boy, the
son of a deacon, receiving a salary of twelve roubles a month&mdash;a
writer of weak verses which are printed, out of pity, in the
'library of short readings.' A man, a boy, who could talk of
nothing but that accursed Shakespeare,&mdash;this boy to be the
husband of Zenaida Moskaloff! Forgive me, Zina, but the
very thought of it all makes me <emph>wild</emph>!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I rejected him, of course. But no power would stop <emph>you</emph>;
your father only blinked his eyes, as usual, and could not
even understand what I was telling him about. You continue
your relations with this boy, even giving him rendezvous,
and, worst of all, you allow yourself to correspond
with him!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Rumours now begin to flit about town: I am assailed
with hints; they blow their trumpets of joy and triumph;
and suddenly all my fears and anticipations are verified!
You and he quarrel over something or other; he shows himself
to be a boy (I can't call him a man!), who is utterly
unworthy of you, and threatens to show your letters all over
the town! On hearing this threat, you, beside yourself
with irritation, boxed his ears. Yes, Zina, I am aware of
even that fact! I know all, all! But to continue&mdash;the wretched
boy shows one of your letters the very same day to that ne'er-do-well
Zanshin, and within an hour Natalie Dimitrievna
holds it in her hands&mdash;my deadly enemy! The same evening
the miserable fellow attempts to put an end to himself,
in remorse. In a word, there is a fearful scandal stirred up.
That slut, Nastasia, comes panting to me with the dreadful
news; she tells me that Natalie Dimitrievna has had your
letter for a whole hour. In a couple of hours the whole
town will learn of your foolishness! I bore it all. I did not
fall down in a swoon; but oh, the blows, the blows you dealt to
my heart, Zina! That shameless scum of the earth, Nastasia,
says she will get the letter back for two hundred roubles! I
myself run over, in thin shoes, too, through the snow to the
Jew Baumstein, and pledge my diamond clasps&mdash;a keepsake
of my dear mother's! In a couple of hours the letter is in
my hands! Nastasia had stolen it; she had broken open
a desk, and your honour was safe!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But what a dreadful day you had sentenced me to live!
I noticed some grey hairs among my raven locks for the
first time, next morning! Zina, you have judged this boy's
action yourself now! You can admit now, and perhaps
smile a bitter smile over the admission, that it was beyond
the limits of good sense to wish to entrust your fate to this
youth.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But since that fatal time you are wretched, my child, you
are miserable! You cannot forget him, or rather not him&mdash;for
he was never worthy of you,&mdash;but you cannot forget
the phantom of your past joy! This wretched young fellow
is now on the point of death&mdash;consumption, they say; and
you, angel of goodness that you are! you do not wish to
marry while he is alive, because you fear to harass him in
his last days; because to this day he is miserable with
jealousy, though I am convinced that he never loved you
in the best and highest sense of the word! I know well
that, hearing of Mosgliakoff's proposal to you, he has been
in a flutter of jealousy, and has spied upon you and your
actions ever since; and you&mdash;you have been merciful to
him, my child. And oh! God knows how I have watered
my pillow with tears for you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, mother, do drop all this sort of thing!</q> cried Zina,
with inexpressible agony in her tone. <q>Surely we needn't
hear all about your pillow!</q> she added, sharply. <q>Can't
we get on without all this declamation and pirouetting?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>You do not believe me, Zina! Oh! do not look so
unfriendly at me, my child! My eyes have not been dry
these two years. I have hidden my tears from you; but I
am changed, Zina mine, much changed and in many ways!
I have long known of your feelings, Zina, but I admit I have
only lately realized the depth of your mental anguish. Can
you blame me, my child, if I looked upon this attachment
of yours as romanticism&mdash;called into being by that accursed
Shakespeare, who shoves his nose in everywhere where he
isn't wanted?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>What mother would blame me for my fears of that kind,
for my measures, for the severity of my judgment? But now,
understanding as I do, and realizing your two years' sufferings,
I can estimate the depth of your real feelings.
Believe me, I understand you far better than you understand
yourself! I am convinced that you love not him&mdash;not
this unnatural boy,&mdash;but your lost happiness, your broken
hopes, your cracked idol!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have loved too&mdash;perhaps more deeply than yourself;
I, too, have suffered, I, too, have lost my exalted ideals and
seen them levelled with the earth; and therefore who can
blame me now&mdash;and, above all, can <emph>you</emph> blame me now,&mdash;if
I consider a marriage with the prince to be the one
saving, the one <emph>essential</emph> move left to you in your present
position</q>?
</p>

<p>
Zina listened to this long declamation with surprise. She
knew well that her mother never adopted this tone without
good reason. However this last and unexpected conclusion
fairly amazed her.
</p>

<p>
<q>You don't mean to say you seriously entertain the idea
of marrying me to this prince?</q> she cried bewildered, and
gazing at her mother almost with alarm; <q>that this is no
mere idea, no project, no flighty inspiration, but your
deliberate intention? I <emph>have</emph> guessed right, then? And
pray, <emph>how</emph> is this marriage going to save me? and <emph>why</emph> is it
essential to me in my present position? And&mdash;and what
has all this to do with what you have been talking about?&mdash;&mdash;I
cannot understand you, mother,&mdash;not a bit!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And <emph>I</emph> can't understand, angel mine, how you <emph>cannot</emph>
see the connection of it all!</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna, in
her turn. <q>In the first place, you would pass into new
society, into a new world. You would leave for ever this
loathsome little town, so full of sad memories for you;
where you meet neither friends nor kindness; where they
have bullied and maligned you; where all these&mdash;these
<emph>magpies</emph> hate you because you are good looking! You
could go abroad this very spring, to Italy, Switzerland, Spain!&mdash;to
Spain, Zina, where the Alhambra is, and where the
Guadalquiver flows&mdash;no wretched little stream like this of
ours!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But, one moment, mother; you talk as though I were
married already, or at least as if the prince had made me an
offer!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, no&mdash;oh dear, no! don't bother yourself about that,
my angel! I know what I'm talking about! Let me proceed.
I've said my <q>firstly;</q> now, then, for my <q>secondly!</q>
I understand, dear child, with what loathing you would give
your hand to that Mosgliakoff!&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I know, without your telling me so, that I shall never
be <emph>his</emph> wife!</q> cried Zina, angrily, and with flashing eyes.
</p>

<p>
<q>If only you knew, my angel, how I understand and enter
into your loathing for him! It is dreadful to vow before
the altar that you will love a man whom you <emph>cannot</emph> love&mdash;how
dreadful to belong to one whom you cannot esteem!
And he insists on your <emph>love</emph>&mdash;he only marries you for love.
I can see it by the way he looks at you! Why deceive ourselves?
I have suffered from the same thing for twenty-five
years; your father ruined me&mdash;he, so to speak,
sucked up my youth! You have seen my tears many a
time!&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Father's away in the country, don't touch <emph>him</emph>, please!</q>
said Zina.
</p>

<p>
<q>I know you always take his part! Oh, Zina, my very
heart trembled within me when I thought to arrange your
marriage with Mosgliakoff for financial reasons! I trembled
for the consequences. But with the prince it is different,
you need not deceive him; you cannot be expected to give
him your <emph>love</emph>, not your <emph>love</emph>&mdash;oh, no! and he is not in a
state to ask it of you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Good heavens, what nonsense! I do assure you you
are in error from the very first step&mdash;from the first and most
important step! Understand, that I do not care to make a
martyr of myself for some unknown reason! Know, also, that
I shall not marry anyone at all; I shall remain a maid. You
have bitten my head off for the last two years because I
would not marry. Well, you must accept the fact, and make
the best of it; that's all I can say, and so it shall be!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But Zina, darling&mdash;my Zina, don't be so cross before
you have heard me out! What a hot-headed little person
you are, to be sure! Let me show you the matter from my
point of view, and you'll agree with me&mdash;you really will!
The prince will live a year&mdash;two at most; and surely it is
better to be a young widow than a decayed old maid! Not
to mention the fact that you will be a princess&mdash;free, rich,
independent! I dare say you look with contempt upon all
these calculations&mdash;founded upon his death; but I am
a mother, and what mother will blame me for my foresight?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And if you, my angel of kindness, are unwilling to marry,
even now, out of tenderness for that wretched boy's feelings,
oh, think, think how, by marrying this prince, you
will rejoice his heart and soothe and comfort his soul! For
if he has a single particle of commonsense, he must understand
that jealousy of this old man were <emph>too</emph> absurd&mdash;<emph>too</emph>
ridiculous! He will understand that you marry him&mdash;for
money, for convenience; that stern necessity compels you
to it!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And lastly, he will understand that&mdash;that,&mdash;well I simply
wish to say, that, upon the prince's death, you will be
at liberty to marry whomsoever you please.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That's a truly simple arrangement! All I have to do is
to marry this prince, rob him of his money, and then count
upon his death in order to marry my lover! You are a
clever arithmetician, mamma; you do your sums and get
your totals nicely. You wish to seduce me by offering me
this! Oh, I understand you, mamma&mdash;I understand you
well! You cannot resist the expression of your noble sentiments
and exalted ideas, even in the manufacture of a
nasty business. Why can't you say simply and straightforwardly,
<q>Zina, this is a dirty affair, but it will pay us, so
please agree with me?</q> at all events, that would be candid
and frank on your part.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But, my dear child, why, <emph>why</emph> look at it from this point
of view? Why look at it under the light of suspicion as
<emph>deceit</emph>, and low cunning, and covetousness? You consider
my calculations as meanness, as deceit; but, by all that is
good and true, where is the meanness? Show me the deceit.
Look at yourself in the glass: you are so beautiful, that a
kingdom would be a fair price for you! And suddenly you,
you, the possessor of this divine beauty, sacrifice yourself,
in order to soothe the last years of an old man's life!
You would be like a beautiful star, shedding your light over
the evening of his days. You would be like the fresh green
ivy, twining in and about his old age; not the stinging
nettle that this wretched woman at his place is, fastening
herself upon him, and thirstily sucking his blood! Surely
his money, his rank are not worthy of being put in the
scales beside <emph>you</emph>? Where is the meanness of it; where is
the deceit of all this? You don't know what you are saying,
Zina.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I suppose they <emph>are</emph> worthy of being weighed against me,
if I am to marry a cripple for them! No, mother, however
you look at it, it is deceit, and you can't get out of <emph>that</emph>!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>On the contrary, my dear child, I can look at it from
a high, almost from an exalted&mdash;nay, Christian&mdash;point of
view. You, yourself, told me once, in a fit of temporary
insanity of some sort, that you wished to be a sister of
charity. You had suffered; you said your heart could love
no more. If, then, you cannot love, turn your thoughts to
the higher aspect of the case. This poor old man has also
suffered&mdash;he is unhappy. I have known him, and felt
the deepest sympathy towards him&mdash;akin to love,&mdash;for
many a year. Be his friend, his daughter, be his plaything,
even, if you like; but warm his old heart, and you
are doing a good work&mdash;a virtuous, kind, noble work of
love.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He may be funny to look at; don't think of that. He's
but half a man&mdash;pity him! You are a Christian girl&mdash;do
whatever is right by him; and this will be medicine for
your own heart-wounds; employment, action, all this will
heal you too, and where is the deceit here? But you do
not believe me. Perhaps you think that I am deceiving
myself when I thus talk of duty and of action. You think
that I, a woman of the world, have no right to good feeling
and the promptings of duty and virtue. Very well, do not
trust me, if you like: insult me, do what you please to your
poor mother; but you will have to admit that her words
carry the stamp of good sense,&mdash;they are saving words!
Imagine that someone else is talking to you, not I. Shut
your eyes, and fancy that some invisible being is speaking.
What is worrying you is the idea that all this is for money&mdash;a
sort of sale or purchase. Very well, then <emph>refuse</emph> the money,
if it is so loathsome to your eyes. Leave just as much as is
absolutely necessary for yourself, and give the rest to the
poor. Help <emph>him</emph>, if you like, the poor fellow who lies there
a-dying!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He would never accept my help!</q> muttered Zina, as
though to herself.
</p>

<p>
<q>He would not, but his mother would!</q> said Maria Alexandrovna.
<q>She would take it, and keep her secret. You
sold your ear-rings, a present from your aunt, half a year or
so ago, and helped her; <emph>I</emph> know all about it! I know, too,
that the woman washes linen in order to support her unfortunate
son!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He will soon be where he requires no more help!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I know, I understand your hints.</q> Maria Alexandrovna
sighed a real sigh. <q rend='pre'>They say he is in a consumption, and
must die.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But <emph>who</emph> says so?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I asked the doctor the other day, because, having a
tender heart, Zina, I felt interested in the poor fellow. The
doctor said that he was convinced the malady was <emph>not</emph> consumption;
that it was dangerous, no doubt, but still <emph>not</emph>
consumption, only some severe affection of the lungs. Ask
him yourself! He certainly told me that under different
conditions&mdash;change of climate and of his style of living,&mdash;the
sick man might well recover. He said&mdash;and I have
read it too, somewhere, that off Spain there is a wonderful
island, called Malaga&mdash;I think it was Malaga; anyhow,
the name was like some wine, where, not only ordinary
sufferers from chest maladies, but even consumptive patients,
recover entirely, solely by virtue of the climate, and
that sick people go there on purpose to be cured.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Oh, but Spain&mdash;the Alhambra alone&mdash;and the lemons,
and the riding on mules. All this is enough in itself to impress
a poetical nature. You think he would not accept
your help, your money&mdash;for such a journey? Very well&mdash;deceit
is permissible where it may save a man's life.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Give him hope, too! Promise him your love; promise
to marry him when you are a widow! Anything in the world
can be said with care and tact! Your own mother would
not counsel you to an ignoble deed, Zina. You will do as I
say, to save this boy's life; and with this object, everything is
permissible! You will revive his hope; he will himself begin
to think of his health, and listen to what the doctor says to
him. He will do his best to resuscitate his dead happiness;
and if he gets well again, even if you never marry him, you
will have saved him&mdash;raised him from the dead!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I can look at him with some sympathy. I admit I can,
now! Perhaps sorrow has changed him for the better; and
I say frankly, if he should be worthy of you when you become
a widow, marry him, by all means! You will be rich
then, and independent. You can not only cure him, but,
having done so, you can give him position in the world&mdash;a
career! Your marriage to him will then be possible and
pardonable, not, as now, an absolute impossibility!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>For what would become of both of you were you to be
capable of such madness <emph>now</emph>? Universal contempt, beggary;
smacking little boys, which is part of his duty; the
reading of Shakespeare; perpetual, hopeless life in Mordasoff;
and lastly his certain death, which will undoubtedly take
place before long unless he is taken away from here!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>While, if you resuscitate him&mdash;if you raise him from the
dead, as it were, you raise him to a good, useful, and
virtuous life! He may then enter public life&mdash;make himself
rank, and a name! At the least, even if he must die,
he will die happy, at peace with himself, in your arms&mdash;for
he will be by then assured of your love and forgiveness
of the past, and lying beneath the scent of myrtles and
lemons, beneath the tropical sky of the South. Oh, Zina,
all this is within your grasp, and all&mdash;all is <emph>gain</emph>. Yes, and
all to be had by merely marrying this prince.</q>
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna broke off, and for several minutes
there was silence; not a word was said on either side:
Zina was in a state of indescribable agitation. I say indescribable
because I will not attempt to describe Zina's feelings:
I cannot guess at them; but I <emph>think</emph> that Maria
Alexandrovna had found the road to her heart.
</p>

<p>
Not knowing how her words had sped with her daughter,
Maria Alexandrovna now began to work her busy brain to
imagine and prepare herself for every possible humour that
Zina might prove to be in; but at last she concluded
that she had happened upon the right track after all. Her
rude hand had touched the sorest place in Zina's heart, but
her crude and absurd sentimental twaddle had not blinded
her daughter. <q>However, that doesn't matter</q>&mdash;thought
the mother. <q>All I care to do is to make her <emph>think</emph>; I
wish my ideas to stick!</q> So she reflected, and she gained
her end; the effect was made&mdash;the arrow reached the
mark. Zina had listened hungrily as her mother spoke;
her cheeks were burning, her breast heaved.
</p>

<p>
<q>Listen, mother,</q> she said at last, with decision; though
the sudden pallor of her face showed clearly what the
decision had cost her. <q>Listen mother&mdash;&mdash;</q> But at
this moment a sudden noise in the entrance hall, and a
shrill female voice, asking for Maria Alexandrovna, interrupted
Zina, while her mother jumped up from her chair.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! the devil fly away with this magpie of a woman!</q>
cried the latter furiously. <q>Why, I nearly drove her out by
force only a fortnight ago!</q> she added, almost in despair.
<q>I can't, I can't receive her now. Zina, this question is too
important to be put off: she must have news for me or she
never would have dared to come. I won't receive the old
&mdash;&mdash; Oh! <emph>how</emph> glad I am to see you, dear Sophia
Petrovna. What lucky chance brought <emph>you</emph> to see me?
What a <emph>charming</emph> surprise!</q> said Maria Alexandrovna,
advancing to receive her guest.
</p>

<p>
Zina escaped out of the room.
</p>


</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER VI.</head>

<p>
Mrs. Colonel Tarpuchin, or Sophia Petrovna, was only
morally like a magpie; she was more akin to the sparrow
tribe, viewed physically. She was a little bit of a woman of
fifty summers or so, with lively eyes, and yellow patches all
over her face. On her little wizened body and spare limbs
she wore a black silk dress, which was perpetually on the
rustle: for this little woman could never sit still for an
instant.
</p>

<p>
This was the most inveterate and bitterest scandal-monger
in the town. She took her stand on the fact that
she was a Colonel's wife, though she often fought with her
husband, the Colonel, and scratched his face handsomely
on such occasions.
</p>

<p>
Add to this, that it was her custom to drink four glasses
of <q>vodki</q> at lunch, or earlier, and four more in the
evening; and that she hated Mrs. Antipova to madness.
</p>

<p>
<q>I've just come in for a minute, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mon ange</foreign>,</q> she panted;
<q>it's no use sitting down&mdash;no time! I wanted to let you
know what's going on, simply that the whole town has
gone mad over this prince. Our <q>beauties,</q> you know
what I mean! are all after him, fishing for him, pulling him
about, giving him champagne&mdash;you would not believe it!
<emph>would</emph> you now? How on earth you could ever have let him
out of the house, I can't understand! Are you aware that
he's at Natalia Dimitrievna's at this moment?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>At <emph>Natalia Dimitrievna's</emph>?</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna
jumping up. <q>Why, he was only going to see the Governor,
and then call in for one moment at the Antipova's!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, yes, just for one moment&mdash;of course! Well, catch
him if you can, there! That's all I can say. He found the
Governor <q>out,</q> and went on to Mrs. Antipova's, where he has
promised to dine. There Natalia caught him&mdash;she is never
away from Mrs. Antipova nowadays,&mdash;and persuaded him
to come away with her to lunch. So there's your prince!
catch him if you can!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But how&mdash;Mosgliakoff's with him&mdash;he promised&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Mosgliakoff, indeed,&mdash;why, he's gone too! and they'll be
playing at cards and clearing him out before he knows
where he is! And the things Natalia is saying, too&mdash;out
loud if you please! She's telling the prince to his face that
you, <emph>you</emph> have got hold of him with certain views&mdash;<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>vous
comprenez</foreign>?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>She calmly tells him this to his face! Of course he doesn't
understand a word of it, and simply sits there like a soaked
cat, and says <q>Ye&mdash;yes!</q> And would you believe it, she has
trotted out her Sonia&mdash;a girl of fifteen, in a dress down
to her knees&mdash;my word on it? Then she has sent for that
little orphan&mdash;Masha; she's in a short dress too,&mdash;why, I
swear it doesn't reach her knees. I looked at it carefully
through my pince-nez! She's stuck red caps with some
sort of feathers in them on their heads, and set them to dance
some silly dance to the piano accompaniment for the prince's
benefit! You know his little weakness as to our sex,&mdash;well,
you can imagine him staring at them through his glass and
saying, <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Charmant!</foreign>&mdash;What figures!</q> Tfu! They've turned
the place into a music hall! Call that a dance! I was
at school at Madame Jarne's, I know, and there were plenty
of princesses and countesses there with me, too; and I know
I danced before senators and councillors, and earned their
applause, too: but as for this dance&mdash;it's a low can-can, and
nothing more! I simply <emph>burned</emph> with shame,&mdash;I couldn't
stand it, and came out.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How! have you been at Natalia Dimitrievna's? Why,
you&mdash;&mdash;!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What!&mdash;she offended me last week? is that what you
you mean? Oh, but, my dear, I <emph>had</emph> to go and have a peep
at the prince&mdash;else, when should I have seen him? As if I
would have gone <emph>near</emph> her but for this wretched old prince.
Imagine&mdash;chocolate handed round and <emph>me left out</emph>. I'll let
her have it for that, some day! Well, good-bye, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mon ange</foreign>:
I must hurry off to Akulina, and let her know all about it.
You may say good-bye to the prince; he won't come near
you again now! He has no memory left, you know, and Mrs.
Antipova will simply carry him off bodily to her house. He'll
think it's all right&mdash;&mdash;They're all afraid of you, you know;
they think that you want to get hold of him&mdash;you understand!
Zina, you know!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Quelle horreur!</foreign></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, yes, I know! I tell you&mdash;the whole town is talking
about it! Mrs. Antipova is going to make him stay to dinner&mdash;and
then she'll just keep him! She's doing it to spite <emph>you</emph>,
my angel. I had a look in at her back premises. <emph>Such</emph> arrangements,
my dear. Knives clattering, people running about for
champagne. I tell you what you must do&mdash;go and grab him
as he comes out from Natalia Dimitrievna's to Antipova's to
dinner. He promised <emph>you</emph> first, he's <emph>your</emph> guest. Tfu! don't
you be laughed at by this brace of chattering magpies&mdash;good
for nothing baggage, both of them. <q>Procuror's lady,</q> indeed!
Why, I'm a Colonel's wife. Tfu!&mdash;<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Mais adieu, mon ange</foreign>.
I have my own sledge at the door, or I'd go with you.</q>
</p>

<p>
Having got rid of this walking newspaper, Maria Alexandrovna
waited a moment, to free herself of a little of her super-abundant
agitation. Mrs. Colonel's advice was good and
practical. There was no use losing time,&mdash;none to lose, in
fact. But the greatest difficulty of all was as yet unsettled.
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna flew to Zina's room.
</p>

<p>
Zina was walking up and down, pale, with hands folded
and head bent on her bosom: there were tears in her eyes,
but Resolve was there too, and sparkled in the glance which
she threw on her mother as the latter entered the room.
She hastily dried her tears, and a sarcastic smile played on
her lips once more.
</p>

<p>
<q>Mamma,</q> she began, anticipating her mother's speech
<q>you have already wasted much of your eloquence over me&mdash;too
much! But you have not blinded me; I am not a
child. To do the work of a sister of mercy, without the
slightest call thereto,&mdash;to justify one's meanness&mdash;meanness
proceeding in reality from the purest egotism, by attributing
to it noble ends,&mdash;all this is a sort of Jesuitism which cannot
deceive <emph>me</emph>. Listen! I repeat, all <emph>this could not deceive me</emph>,
and I wish you to understand that!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But, dearest child!</q> began her mother, in some alarm.
</p>

<p>
<q>Be quiet, mamma; have patience, and hear me out. In
spite of the full consciousness that all this is pure Jesuitism,
and in spite of my full knowledge of the absolutely ignoble
character of such an act, I accept your proposition in full,&mdash;you
hear me&mdash;<emph>in full</emph>; and inform you hereby, that I am
ready to marry the prince. More! I am ready to help
you to the best of my power in your endeavours to lure the
prince into making me an offer. Why do I do this? You
need not know that; enough that I have consented. I have
consented to the whole thing&mdash;to bringing him his boots, to
serving him; I will dance for him, that my meanness may
be in some sort atoned. I shall do all I possibly can so
that he shall never regret that he married me! But in
return for my consent I insist upon knowing <emph>how</emph> you intend
to bring the matter about? Since you have spoken
so warmly on the subject&mdash;I know you!&mdash;I am convinced
you must have some definite plan of operation in your head.
Be frank for once in your life; your candour is the essential
condition upon which alone I give my consent. I shall not
decide until you have told me what I require!</q>
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna was so surprised by the unexpected
conclusion at which Zina arrived, that she stood before the
latter some little while, dumb with amazement, and staring at
her with all her eyes. Prepared to have to combat the
stubborn romanticism of her daughter&mdash;whose obstinate
nobility of character she always feared,&mdash;she had suddenly
heard this same daughter consent to all that her mother
had required of her.
</p>

<p>
Consequently, the matter had taken a very different complexion.
Her eyes sparkled with delight:
</p>

<p>
<q>Zina, Zina!</q> she cried; <q>you are my life, my&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
She could say no more, but fell to embracing and kissing
her daughter.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, mother, I don't <emph>want</emph> all this kissing!</q> cried Zina,
with impatience and disgust. <q>I don't need all this rapture
on your part; all I want is a plain answer to my
question!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But, Zina, I love you; I adore you, darling, and you
repel me like this! I am working for your happiness, child!</q>
</p>

<p>
Tears sparkled in her eyes. Maria Alexandrovna really
loved her daughter, in her own way, and just now she
actually felt deeply, for once in her life&mdash;thanks to her
agitation, and the success of her eloquence.
</p>

<p>
Zina, in spite of her present distorted view of things in
general, knew that her mother loved her; but this love only
annoyed her; she would much rather&mdash;it would have been
easier for her&mdash;if it had been hate!
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, well; don't be angry, mamma&mdash;I'm so excited
just now!</q> she said, to soothe her mother's feelings.
</p>

<p>
<q>I'm not angry, I'm not angry, darling! I know you
are much agitated!</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna. <q>You
say, my child, that you wish me to be candid: very well, I
will; I will be <emph>quite</emph> frank, I assure you. But you might
have trusted me! Firstly, then, I must tell you that I have
no actually organized plan yet&mdash;no <emph>detailed</emph> plan, that is.
You must understand, with that clever little head of yours,
you must see, Zina, that I <emph>cannot</emph> have such a plan, all cut
out. I even anticipate some difficulties. Why, that magpie
of a woman has just been telling me all sorts of things. We
ought to be quick, by the bye; you see, I am quite open with
you! But I swear to you that the end shall be attained!</q>
she added, ecstatically. <q rend='pre'>My convictions are not the result
of a poetical nature, as you told me just now; they are
founded on facts. I rely on the weakness of the prince's
intellect&mdash;which is a canvas upon which one can stitch any
pattern one pleases!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The only fear is, we may be interfered with! But a
fool of a woman like that is not going to get the better of
<emph>me</emph>!</q> she added, stamping her foot, and with flashing eyes.
<q>That's my part of the business, though; and to manage it
thoroughly I must begin as soon as possible&mdash;in fact, the
whole thing, or the most important part of it, must be arranged
this very day!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well, mamma; but now listen to one more piece
of candour. Do you know why I am so interested in your
plan of operations, and do not trust it? because I am not
sure of myself! I have told you already that I consent
to this&mdash;&mdash;meanness; but I must warn you that if I find
the details of your plan of operations <emph>too</emph> dirty, too mean
and repulsive, I shall not be able to stand it, and shall
assuredly throw you over. I know that this is a new
pettiness, to consent to a wicked thing and then fear the dirt
in which it floats! But what's to be done? So it will be,
and I warn you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But Zina, dear child, where is the wickedness in this?</q>
asked Maria Alexandrovna timidly. <q>It is simply a matter
of a marriage for profit; everybody does it! Look at it in
this light, and you will see there is nothing particular in it;
it is good <q>form</q> enough!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, mamma, don't try to play the fox over me! Don't
you see that I have consented to everything&mdash;to <emph>everything</emph>?
What else do you require of me? Don't be alarmed if I
call things by their proper names! For all you know it
may be my only comfort!</q> And a bitter smile played over
her lips.
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well, very well, dear! we may disagree as to ideas
and yet be very fond of one another. But if you are afraid
of the working of my plan, and dread that you will see any
baseness or meanness about it, leave it all to me, dear, and
I guarantee you that not a particle of dirt shall soil you!
Your hands shall be clean! As if I would be the one to
compromise you! Trust me entirely, and all shall go
grandly and with dignity; all shall be done worthily; there
shall be no scandal&mdash;even if there be a whisper afterwards,
we shall all be out of the way, far off! We shall not stay
here, of course! Let them <emph>howl</emph> if they like, <emph>we</emph> won't care.
Besides, they are not worth bothering about, and I wonder
at your being so frightened of these people, Zina. Don't
be angry with me! how can you be so frightened, with your
proud nature?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I'm not frightened; you don't understand me a bit!</q>
said Zina, in a tone of annoyance.
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well, darling; don't be angry. I only talk like
this because these people about here are always stirring
up mud, if they can; while you&mdash;this is the first time
in your life you have done a mean action.&mdash;<emph>Mean</emph> action!
What an old fool I am! On the contrary, this is a most
generous, <emph>noble</emph> act! I'll prove this to you once more, Zina.
Firstly, then, it all depends upon the point of view you
take up&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! bother your proofs, mother. I've surely had
enough of them by now,</q> cried Zina angrily, and stamped
her foot on the floor.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, darling, I won't; it was stupid of me&mdash;I won't!</q>
</p>

<p>
There was another moment's silence. Maria Alexandrovna
looked into her daughter's eyes as a little dog looks into the
eyes of its mistress.
</p>

<p>
<q>I don't understand how you are going to set about it,</q>
said Zina at last, in a tone of disgust. <q>I feel sure you
will only plunge yourself into a pool of shame! I'm not
thinking of these people about here. I despise their
opinions; but it would be very ignominious for <emph>you</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! if that's all, my dear child, don't bother your head
about it: please, <emph>please</emph> don't! Let us be agreed about it,
and then you need not fear for me. Dear me! if you but
knew, though, what things I have done, and kept my skin
whole! I tell you this is <emph>nothing</emph> in comparison with <emph>real</emph>
difficulties which I have arranged successfully. Only let
me try. But, first of all we must get the prince <emph>alone</emph>, and
that as soon as possible. That's the first move: all the rest
will depend upon the way we manage this. However, I can
foresee the result. They'll all rise against us; but I'll manage
<emph>them</emph> all right! I'm a little nervous about Mosgliakoff.
He&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Mosgliakoff!</q> said Zina, contemptuously.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, but don't you be afraid, Zina! I'll give you my word
I'll work him so that he shall help us himself. You don't
know me yet, my Zina. My child, when I heard about this
old prince having arrived this morning, the idea, as it were,
shone out all at once in my brain! Who would have
thought of his really coming to us like this! It is a chance
such as you might wait for a thousand years in vain. Zina,
my angel! there's no shame in what you are doing. What
<emph>is</emph> wrong is to marry a man whom you loathe. Your marriage
with the prince will be no <emph>real</emph> marriage; it is simply
a domestic contract. It is he, the old fool, who gains by it.
It is <emph>he</emph> who is made unspeakably, immeasurably happy.
Oh! Zina, how lovely you look to-day. If I were a man I
would give you half a kingdom if you but raised your finger
for it! <emph>Asses</emph> they all are! Who wouldn't kiss a hand like
this?</q> and Maria Alexandrovna kissed her daughter's hand
warmly. <q>Why, this is my own flesh and blood, Zina.
What's to be done afterwards? You won't part with me,
will you? You won't drive your old mother away when you
are happy yourself? No, darling, for though we have
quarrelled often enough, you have not such another friend
as I am, Zina! You&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Mamma, if you've made up your mind to it all, perhaps
it is time you set about making some move in the matter.
We are losing time,</q> said Zina, impatiently.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, it is, it is indeed time; and here am I gabbling on
while they are all doing their best to seduce the prince
away from us. I must be off at once. I shall find them,
and bring the prince back by force, if need be. Good-bye,
Zina, darling child. Don't be afraid, and don't look sad,
dear; please don't! It will be all well, nay, <emph>gloriously</emph> well!
Good-bye, good-bye!</q>
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna made the sign of the Cross over
Zina, and dashed out of the room. She stopped one
moment at her looking-glass to see that all was right,
and then, in another minute, was seated in her carriage
and careering through the Mordasoff streets. Maria Alexandrovna
lived in good style, and her carriage was always
in waiting at that hour in case of need.
</p>

<p>
<q>No, no, my dears! it's not for <emph>you</emph> to outwit me,</q> she
thought, as she drove along. <q>Zina agrees; so half the
work is done. Oh, Zina, Zina! so your imagination is
susceptible to pretty little visions, is it? and I <emph>did</emph> treat her
to a pretty little picture. She was really touched at last;
and how lovely the child looked to-day! If I had her beauty
I should turn half Europe topsy-turvy. But wait a bit, it's
all right. Shakespeare will fly away to another world when
you're a princess, my dear, and know a few people. What
does she know? Mordasoff and the tutor! And what a
princess she will make. I <emph>love</emph> to see her pride and pluck.
She looks at you like any queen. And not to know her own
good! However, she soon will. Wait a bit; let this old
fool die, and then the boy, and I'll marry her to a reigning
prince yet! The only thing I'm afraid of is&mdash;haven't I
trusted her too much? Didn't I allow my feelings to run
away with me too far? I am anxious about her. I am
anxious, anxious!</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus Maria Alexandrovna reflected as she drove along.
She was a busy woman, was Maria Alexandrovna.
</p>

<p>
Zina, left alone, continued her solitary walk up and down
the room with folded hands and thoughtful brow. She had
a good deal to think of! Over and over again she repeated,
<q>It's time&mdash;it's time&mdash;oh, it's time!</q> What did this ejaculation
mean? Once or twice tears glistened on her long
silken eyelashes, and she did not attempt to wipe them
away.
</p>

<p>
Her mother worried herself in vain, as far as Zina was
concerned; for her daughter had quite made up her mind:&mdash;she
was ready, come what might!
</p>

<p>
<q>Wait a bit!</q> said the widow to herself, as she picked
her way out of her hiding-place, after having observed and
listened to the interview between Zina and her mother.
<q>And I was thinking of a wedding dress for myself; I
positively thought the prince would really come my way!
So much for <emph>my</emph> wedding dress&mdash;what a fool I was! Oho!
Maria Alexandrovna&mdash;I'm a baggage, am I&mdash;and a beggar;&mdash;and
I took a bribe of two hundred roubles from you,
did I? And I didn't spend it on expenses connected with
your precious daughter's letter, did I? and break open a
desk for your sake with my own hands! Yes, madam; I'll
teach you what sort of a baggage Nastasia Petrovna is;
both of you shall know her a little better yet! Wait a
bit!</q>
</p>



</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER VII.</head>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna's genius had conceived a great and
daring project.
</p>

<p>
To marry her daughter to a rich man, a prince, and a
cripple; to marry her secretly, to take advantage of the
senile feebleness of her guest, to marry her daughter to this
old man <emph>burglariously</emph>, as her enemies would call it,&mdash;was
not only a daring, it was a downright audacious, project.
</p>

<p>
Of course, in case of success, it would be a profitable
undertaking enough; but in the event of <emph>non</emph>-success, what an
ignominious position for the authors of such a failure.
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna knew all this, but she did not
despair. She had been through deeper mire than this, as
she had rightly informed Zina.
</p>

<p>
Undoubtedly all this looked rather too like a robbery on
the high road to be altogether pleasant; but Maria
Alexandrovna did not dwell much on this thought. She
had one very simple but very pointed notion on the
subject: namely, this&mdash;<q><emph>once married they can't be unmarried
again</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
It was a simple, but very pleasant reflection, and
the very thought of it gave Maria Alexandrovna a tingling
sensation in all her limbs. She was in a great state
of agitation, and sat in her carriage as if on pins and
needles. She was anxious to begin the fray: her grand
plan of operations was drawn up; but there were thousands
of small details to be settled, and these must depend upon
circumstances. She was not agitated by fear of failure&mdash;oh
dear, no! all she minded was delay! she feared the
delay and obstructions that might be put in her way by the
Mordasoff ladies, whose pretty ways she knew so well! She
was well aware that probably at this moment the whole
town knew all about her present intentions, though she had
not revealed them to a living soul. She had found out by
painful experience that nothing, not the most secret event,
could happen in her house in the morning but it was
known at the farthest end of the town by the evening.
</p>

<p>
Of course, no anticipation, no presentiment, deterred
or deceived Maria Alexandrovna: she might feel such sensations
at times, but she despised them. Now, this is what
had happened in the town this morning, and of which our
heroine was as yet only partly informed. About mid-day,
that is, just three hours after the prince's arrival at
Mordasoff, extraordinary rumours began to circulate about
the town.
</p>

<p>
Whence came they? Who spread them? None could
say; but they spread like wild-fire. Everyone suddenly
began to assure his neighbour that Maria Alexandrovna had
engaged her daughter to the prince; that Mosgliakoff had
notice to quit, and that all was settled and signed, and the
penniless, twenty-three-year-old Zina was to be the
princess.
</p>

<p>
Whence came this rumour? Could it be that Maria
Alexandrovna was so thoroughly known that her friends
could anticipate her thoughts and actions under any given
circumstances?
</p>

<p>
The fact is, every inhabitant of a provincial town lives
under a glass case; there is no possibility of his keeping
anything whatever secret from his honourable co-dwellers in
the place. They know <emph>everything</emph>; they know it, too, better
than he does himself. Every provincial person should be a
psychologist by nature; and that is why I have been surprised,
often and often, to observe when I am among provincials
that there is not a great number of psychologists&mdash;as
one would expect,&mdash;but an infinite number of dreadful
asses. However, this a digression.
</p>

<p>
The rumour thus spread, then, was a thunder-like and
startling shock to the Mordasoff system. Such a marriage&mdash;a
marriage with this prince&mdash;appeared to all to be a thing so
very desirable, so brilliant, that the strange side of the affair
had not seemed to strike anyone as yet!
</p>

<p>
One more circumstance must be noticed. Zina was even
more detested in the place than her mother; why, I don't
know. Perhaps her beauty was the prime cause. Perhaps,
too, it was that Maria Alexandrovna was, as it were, one of
themselves, a fruit of their own soil: if she was to go away
she might even be missed; she kept the place alive more or
less&mdash;it might be dull without her! But with Zina it was
quite a different matter: she lived more in the clouds than
in the town of Mordasoff. She was no company for these
good people; she could not pair with them. Perhaps she
bore herself towards them, unconsciously though, too
haughtily.
</p>

<p>
And now this same Zina, this haughty girl, about whom
there were certain scandalous stories afloat, this same Zina
was to become a millionaire, a princess, and a woman of
rank and eminence!
</p>

<p>
In a couple of years she might marry again, some duke,
perhaps, or a general, maybe a Governor; their own
Governor was a widower, and very fond of the ladies!
Then she would be the first lady of their province! Why,
the very thought of such a thing would be intolerable: in
fact, this rumour of Zina's marriage with the prince aroused
more irritation in Mordasoff than any other piece of gossip
within the memory of man!
</p>

<p>
People told each other that it was a sin and a shame, that
the prince was crazy, that the old man was being deceived,
caught, robbed&mdash;anything you like; that the prince must be
saved from the bloodthirsty talons he had floundered into;
that the thing was simply robbery, immorality. And why
were any others worse than Zina? Why should not somebody
else marry the prince?
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna only guessed at all this at present&mdash;but
that was quite enough. She knew that the whole town
would rise up and use all and every means to defeat her
ends. Why, they had tried to <q>confiscate</q> the prince
already; she would have to retrieve him by force, and if
she should succeed in luring or forcing him back now,
she could not keep him tied to her apron-strings for ever.
Again, what was to prevent this whole troop of Mordasoff
gossips from coming <foreign rend='italic'>en masse</foreign> to her salon, under such a
plausible plea, too, that she would not be able to turn them
out. She knew well that if kicked out of the door these
good people would get in at the window&mdash;a thing which had
actually happened before now at Mordasoff.
</p>

<p>
In a word, there was not an hour, not a moment to be
lost; and meanwhile things were not even begun. A
brilliant idea now struck Maria Alexandrovna. We shall hear
what this idea was in its proper place, meanwhile I will only
state that my heroine dashed through the streets of Mordasoff,
looking like a threatening storm-cloud as she swept
along full of the stern and implacable resolve that the prince
should come back if she had to drag him, and fight for
him; and that all Mordasoff might fall in ruins but she
should have her way!
</p>

<p>
Her first move was successful&mdash;it could not have been
more so.
</p>

<p>
She chanced to meet the prince in the street, and carried
him off to dinner with her.
</p>

<p>
If my reader wishes to know <emph>how</emph> this feat was accomplished
with such a circle of enemies about and around her,
and how she managed to make such a fool of Mrs. Antipova,
then I must be allowed to point out that such a question
is an insult to Maria Alexandrovna. As if <emph>she</emph> were not
capable of outwitting any Antipova that ever breathed!
</p>

<p>
She simply <q>arrested</q> the prince at her rival's very door,
as he alighted there with Mosgliakoff, in spite of the latter's
terror of a scandal, and in spite of everything else; and she
popped the old man into the carriage beside her. Of course
the prince made very little resistance, and as usual, forgot
all about the episode in a couple of minutes, and was as
happy as possible.
</p>

<p>
At dinner he was hilarious to a degree; he made jokes
and fun, and told stories which had no ends, or which he
tacked on to ends belonging to other stories, without remarking
the fact.
</p>

<p>
He had had three glasses of champagne at lunch at
Natalie Dimitrievna's. He now took more wine, and his
old head whirled with it. Maria Alexandrovna plied him
well. The dinner was very good: the mistress of the house
kept the company alive with most bewitching airs and
manners,&mdash;at least so it should have been, but all excepting
herself and the prince were terribly dull on this occasion.
Zina sat silent and grave. Mosgliakoff was clearly off his
feed: he was very thoughtful; and as this was unusual
Maria Alexandrovna was considerably anxious about him.
The widow looked cross and cunning; she continually
made mysterious signs to Mosgliakoff on the sly; but the
latter took no notice of them.
</p>

<p>
If the mistress herself had not been so amiable and bewitching,
the dinner party might have been mistaken for
a lunch at a funeral!
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile Maria Alexandrovna's condition of mind was
in reality excited and agitated to a terrible degree. Zina
alone terrified her by her tragic look and tearful eyes. And
there was another difficulty&mdash;for that accursed Mosgliakoff
would probably sit about and get in the way of business!
One could not well set about it with him in the room!
</p>

<p>
So, Maria Alexandrovna rose from the table in some
agitation.
</p>

<p>
But what was her amazement, her joyful surprise, when
Mosgliakoff came up to her after dinner, of his own accord,
and suddenly and most unexpectedly informed her that he
must&mdash;to his infinite regret&mdash;leave the house on important
business for a short while.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, where are you going to?</q> she asked, with great
show of regret.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, you see,</q> began Mosgliakoff, rather disconcerted
and uncomfortable, <q>I have to&mdash;<emph>may</emph> I come to you for
advice?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What is it&mdash;what is it?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, you see, my godfather Borodueff&mdash;you know the
man; I met him in the street to-day, and he is dreadfully
angry with me, says I am grown so <emph>proud</emph>, that though
I have been in Mordasoff three times I have never shown
my nose inside his doors. He asked me to come in for a
cup of tea at five&mdash;it's four now. He has no children, you
know,&mdash;and he is worth a million of roubles&mdash;<emph>more</emph>, they say;
and if I marry Zina&mdash;you see,&mdash;and he's seventy years old
now!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, my good boy, of course, of course!&mdash;what are you
thinking of? You must not neglect that sort of thing&mdash;go
at once, of course! I <emph>thought</emph> you looked preoccupied at
dinner. You ought to have gone this morning and shewn
him that you cared for him, and so on. Oh, you boys, you
boys!</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna with difficulty concealing
her joy.
</p>

<p>
<q>Thanks, thanks, Maria Alexandrovna! you've made a
man of me again! I declare I quite feared telling you&mdash;for
I know you didn't think much of the connection.&mdash;He is a
common sort of old fellow, I know! So good-bye&mdash;my respects
to Zina, and apologies&mdash;I must be off, of course I
shall be back soon!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Good-bye&mdash;take my blessing with you; say something
polite to the old man for me; I have long changed my
opinion of him; I have grown to like the real old Russian
style of the man. <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Au revoir, mon ami, au revoir!</foreign></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, it <emph>is</emph> a mercy that the devil has carried him off,
out of the way!</q> she reflected, flushing with joy as Paul
took his departure out of the room. But Paul had only
just reached the hall and was putting on his fur coat when
to him appeared&mdash;goodness knows whence&mdash;the widow,
Nastasia Petrovna. She had been waiting for him.
</p>

<p>
<q>Where are you going to?</q> she asked, holding him by
the arm.
</p>

<p>
<q>To my godfather Borodueff's&mdash;a rich old fellow; I
want him to leave me money. Excuse me&mdash;I'm in rather
a hurry!</q>
</p>

<p>
Mosgliakoff was in a capital humour!
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! then say good-bye to your betrothed!</q> remarked
the widow, cuttingly.
</p>

<p>
<q>And why <q>good-bye</q>?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why; you think she's yours already, do you? and they
are going to marry her to the prince! I heard them say so
myself!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>To the prince? Oh, come now, Nastasia Petrovna!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, it's not a case of 'come now' at all! Would you
like to see and hear it for yourself? Put down your coat,
and come along here,&mdash;this way!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Excuse me, Nastasia Petrovna, but I don't understand
what you are driving at!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! you'll understand fast enough if you just bend
down here and listen! The comedy is probably just beginning!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What comedy?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Hush! don't talk so loud! The comedy of humbugging
<emph>you</emph>. This morning, when you went away with the
prince, Maria Alexandrovna spent a whole hour talking
Zina over into marrying the old man! She told her that
nothing was easier than to lure the prince into marrying
her; and all sorts of other things that were enough to make
one sick! Zina agreed. You should have heard the pretty
way in which <emph>you</emph> were spoken of! They think you simply
a fool! Zina said plump out that she would never marry
you! Listen now, listen!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why&mdash;why&mdash;it would be most godless cunning,</q> Paul
stammered, looking sheepishly into Nastasia's eyes.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, just you listen&mdash;you'll hear that, and more
besides!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But how am I to listen?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Here, bend down here. Do you see that keyhole!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! but, Nastasia Petrovna, I can't eavesdrop, you
know!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, nonsense, nonsense! Put your pride in your pocket!
You've come, and you must listen now!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, at all events&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! if you can't bear to be an eavesdropper, let it alone,
and be made a fool of! One goes out of one's way solely
out of pity for you, and you must needs make difficulties!
What is it to me? I'm not doing this for myself! <emph>I</emph> shall
leave the house before night, in any case!</q>
</p>

<p>
Paul, steeling his heart, bent to the keyhole.
</p>

<p>
His pulses were raging and throbbing. He did not realise
what was going on, or what he was doing, or where he was.
</p>



</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER VIII.</head>

<p>
<q>So you were very gay, prince, at Natalia Dimitrievna's?</q>
asked Maria Alexandrovna, surveying the battlefield before
her; she was anxious to begin the conversation as innocently
as possible; but her heart beat loud with hope and agitation.
</p>

<p>
After dinner the Prince had been carried off to the salon,
where he was first received in the morning. Maria Alexandrovna
prided herself on this room, and always used it on
state occasions.
</p>

<p>
The old man, after his six glasses of champagne, was not
very steady on his legs; but he talked away all the more,
for the same reason.
</p>

<p>
Surveying the field of battle before the fray, Maria
Alexandrovna had observed with satisfaction that the
voluptuous old man had already begun to regard Zina with
great tenderness, and her maternal heart beat high with joy.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! ch&mdash;charming&mdash;very gay indeed!</q> replied the
prince, <q>and, do you know, Nat&mdash;alia Dimitrievna is a
wo&mdash;wonderful woman, a ch&mdash;charming woman!</q>
</p>

<p>
Howsoever busy with her own high thoughts and exalted
ideas, Maria Alexandrovna's heart waxed wrathful to hear
such a loud blast of praise on her rival's account.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! Prince,</q> she began, with flashing eyes, <q>if Natalia
Dimitrievna is a charming woman in your eyes, then I
really don't know <emph>what</emph> to think! After such a statement,
dear Prince, you must not claim to know society here&mdash;no,
no!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Really! You sur&mdash;pr&mdash;prise me!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I assure you&mdash;I assure you, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mon cher</foreign> Prince! Listen
Zina, I must just tell the prince that absurd story about
what Natalia Dimitrievna did when she was here last week.
Dearest prince, I am not a scandal-monger, but I must, I
really <emph>must</emph> tell you this, if only to make you laugh, and to
show you a living picture, as it were, of what people are
like in this place! Well, last week this Natalia Dimitrievna
came to call upon me. Coffee was brought in, and I had to
leave the room for a moment&mdash;I forget why&mdash;at all events,
I went out. Now, I happened to have remarked how much
sugar there was in the silver sugar basin; it was quite full.
Well, I came back in a few minutes&mdash;looked at the sugar
basin, and!&mdash;&mdash;three lumps&mdash;three little wretched lumps
at the very bottom of the basin, prince!&mdash;and she was all
alone in the room, mind! Now that woman has a large
house of her own, and lots of money! Of course this is
merely a funny story&mdash;but you can judge from this what
sort of people one has to deal with here!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>N&mdash;no! you don't mean it!</q> said the prince, in real
astonishment. <q>What a gr&mdash;eedy woman! Do you mean
to say she ate it all up?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There, prince, and that's your <q>charming woman!</q>
What do you think of <emph>that</emph> nice little bit of lady-like
conduct? I think I should have died of shame if
I had ever allowed myself to do such a dirty thing as
that!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, ye&mdash;yes! but, do you know, she is a real
<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>belle femme</foreign></q> all the same!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What! Natalia Dimitrievna? My dear prince; why,
she is a mere tub of a woman! Oh! prince, prince!
what have you said? I expected far better taste of <emph>you</emph>,
prince!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, tub&mdash;tub, of course! but she's a n&mdash;nice
figure, a nice figure! And the girl who danced&mdash;oh! a
nice figure too, a very nice figure of a wo&mdash;woman!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What, Sonia? Why she's a mere child, prince? She's
only thirteen years old.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, ye&mdash;yes, of course; but her figure de&mdash;velops
very fast&mdash;charming, charming! And the other da&mdash;ancing
girl, she's de&mdash;veloping too&mdash;nicely: she's dirty rather&mdash;she
might have washed her hands, but very at&mdash;tractive, charming!</q>
and the prince raised his glass again and hungrily
inspected Zina. <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Mais quelle charmante personne!</foreign>&mdash;what a
lovely girl!</q> he muttered, melting with satisfaction.
</p>

<p>
<q>Zina, play us something, or&mdash;better still, sing us a
song! How she sings, prince! she's an artiste&mdash;a real
artiste; oh if you only knew, dear prince,</q> continued Maria
Alexandrovna, in a half whisper, as Zina rose to go to the
piano with her stately but quiet gait and queenly composure,
which evidently told upon the old man; <q>if you
only knew what a daughter that is to me! how she can
love; how tender, how affectionate she is to me! what
taste she has, what a heart!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes! ye&mdash;yes! taste. And do you know, I have only
known one woman in all my life who could compare with
her in love&mdash;liness. It was the late C&mdash;ountess Nainsky: she
died thirty years ago, a w&mdash;onderful woman, and her beauty
was quite sur&mdash;passing. She married her co&mdash;ook at last.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Her cook, prince?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, her cook, a Frenchman, abroad. She bought
him a count's title a&mdash;broad; he was a good-looking fellow
enough, with little moustaches&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And how did they get on?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, very well indeed; however, they p&mdash;arted very soon;
they quarrelled about some sa&mdash;sauce. He robbed her&mdash;and
bo&mdash;olted.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Mamma, what shall I play?</q> asked Zina.
</p>

<p>
<q>Better sing us something, Zina. <emph>How</emph> she sings,
prince! Do you like music?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, ye&mdash;yes! charming, charming. I love music pass&mdash;sionately.
I knew Beethoven, abroad.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Knew Beethoven!</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna, ecstatically.
<q>Imagine, Zina, the prince knew Beethoven! Oh,
prince, did you really, <emph>really</emph> know the great Beethoven?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, we were great friends, Beet&mdash;hoven and I; he
was always taking snuff&mdash;such a funny fellow!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What, Beethoven?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, Beethoven; or it may have been some other
German fellow&mdash;I don't know; there are a great many
Germans there. I forget.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, what shall I sing, mamma?</q> asked Zina again.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh Zina darling, do sing us that lovely ballad all about
knights, you know, and the girl who lived in a castle and
loved a troubadour. Don't you know! Oh, prince, how I
do <emph>love</emph> all those knightly stories and songs, and the castles!
Oh! the castles, and life in the middle ages, and the
troubadours, and heralds and all. Shall I accompany you,
Zina? Sit down near here, prince. Oh! those castles,
those castles!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, ye&mdash;yes, castles; I love ca&mdash;astles
too!</q> observed the prince, staring at Zina all the while
with the whole of his one eye, as if he would like to eat her
up at once. <q>But, good heavens,</q> he cried, <q>that song!
I know that s&mdash;song. I heard that song years&mdash;years ago!
Oh! how that song reminds me of so&mdash;omething. Oh, oh.</q>
</p>

<p>
I will not attempt to describe the ecstatic state of the
prince while Zina sang.
</p>

<p>
She warbled an old French ballad which had once been
all the fashion. Zina sang it beautifully; her lovely face,
her glorious eyes, her fine sweet contralto voice, all this
went to the prince's heart at once; and her dark thick hair,
her heaving bosom, her proud, beautiful, stately figure as she
sat at the piano, and played and sang, quite finished him.
He never took his eyes off her, he panted with excitement.
His old heart, partially revivified with champagne, with the
music, and with awakening recollections (and who is there
who has no beloved memories of the past?), his old heart
beat faster and faster. It was long since it had last beat in
this way. He was ready to fall on his knees at her feet,
when Zina stopped singing, and he was almost in tears with
various emotions.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, my charming, charming child,</q> he cried, putting his
lips to her fingers, <q>you have ra&mdash;vished me quite&mdash;quite! I
remember all now. Oh charming, charming child!&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
The poor prince could not finish his sentence.
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna felt that the moment had arrived for
her to make a move.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, <emph>why</emph> do you bury yourself alive as you do,
prince?</q> she began, solemnly. <q>So much taste, so much
vital energy, so many rich gifts of the mind and soul&mdash;and
to hide yourself in solitude all your days; to flee from mankind,
from your friends. Oh, it is unpardonable! Prince,
bethink yourself. Look up at life again with open eyes.
Call up your dear memories of the past; think of your
golden youth&mdash;your golden, careless, happy days of youth!
Wake them, wake them from the dead, Prince! and wake
yourself, too; and recommence life among men and
women and society! Go abroad&mdash;to Italy, to Spain, oh, to
Spain, Prince! You must have a guide, a heart that will
love and respect, and sympathize with you! You have
friends; summon them about you! Give the word, and
they will rally round you in crowds! I myself will be the
first to throw up everything, and answer to your cry! I remembered
our old friendship, my Prince; and I will sacrifice
husband, home, all, and follow you. Yes, and were I
but young and lovely, like my daughter here, I would be
your fellow, your friend, your <emph>wife</emph>, if you said but the word!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And I am convinced that you were a most charming
creature in your day, too!</q> said the prince, blowing his
nose violently. His eyes were full of tears.
</p>

<p>
<q>We live again in our children,</q> said Maria Alexandrovna,
with great feeling. <q>I, too, have my guardian angel, and
that is this child, my daughter, Prince, the partner of my
heart and of all my thoughts! She has refused seven offers
because she is unwilling to leave me! So that she will
go too, when you accompany me abroad.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In that case, I shall certainly go abroad,</q> cried the
prince with animation. <q>As&mdash;suredly I shall go! And
if only I could ve&mdash;venture to hope&mdash;oh! you be&mdash;witching
child, charming, be&mdash;witching child!</q> And the
prince recommenced to kiss Zina's fingers. The poor
old man was evidently meditating going down on his knees
before her.
</p>

<p>
<q>But, Prince,</q> began Maria Alexandrovna again, feeling
that the opportunity had arrived for another display of eloquence.
<q rend='pre'>But, Prince, you say, <q>If only I could flatter
myself into indulging any hope!</q> Why, what a strange
man you are, Prince. Surely you do not suppose that you
are unworthy the flattering attention of <emph>any</emph> woman! It is
not only youth that constitutes true beauty. Remember
that you are, so to speak, a chip of the tree of aristocracy.
You are a representative of all the most knightly, most refined
taste and culture and manners. Did not Maria fall in
love with the old man Mazeppa? I remember reading that
Lauzun, that fascinating marquis of the court of Louis (I
forget which), when he was an old, bent and bowed man,
won the heart of one of the youngest and most beautiful
women about the court.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And who told you you are an old man? Who taught you
that nonsense? Do men like you ever grow old? You,
with your wealth of taste and wit, and animation and vital
energy and brilliant manners! Just you make your appearance
at some watering-place abroad with a young wife on
your arm&mdash;some lovely young girl like my Zina, for instance&mdash;of
course I merely mention her as an example, nothing
more,&mdash;and you will see at once what a colossal effect you
will produce: you, a scion of our aristocracy; she a beauty
among beauties! You will lead her triumphantly on your
arm; she, perhaps, will sing in some brilliant assemblage;
you will delight the company with your wit. Why, all the
people of the place will crowd to see you! All Europe will
ring with your renown, for every newspaper and feuilleton
at the Waters will be full of you. And yet you say, <q>If I
could but <emph>venture</emph> to <emph>hope</emph>,</q> indeed!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The feuilletons! yes&mdash;ye&mdash;yes, and the newspapers,</q>
said the prince, growing more and more feeble with love,
but not understanding half of Maria Alexandrovna's tall talk.
<q>But, my child, if you're not tired, do repeat that song
which you have just sung so cha&mdash;armingly once more.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! but, Prince, she has other lovely songs, still prettier
ones; don't you remember <hi rend='italic'>L'Hirondelle</hi>? You must
have heard it, haven't you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, I remember it; at least I've for&mdash;gotten it.
No, no! the one you have just sung. I don't want the
Hir&mdash;ondelle! I want that other song,</q> whined the prince,
just like any child.
</p>

<p>
Zina sang again.
</p>

<p>
This time the prince could not contain himself; he fell
on his knees at her feet, he cried, he sobbed:
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, my beautiful <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>chatelaine</foreign>!</q> he cried in his shaky old
voice&mdash;shaky with old age and emotion combined. <q>Oh,
my charming, charming <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>chatelaine</foreign>! oh, my dear child!
You have re&mdash;minded me of so much that is long, long
passed! I always thought then that things must be fairer
in the future than in the present. I used to sing duets with
the vis&mdash;countess in this very ballad! And now, oh! I don't
know what to do, I don't know <emph>what</emph> to do!</q>
</p>

<p>
The prince panted and choked as he spoke; his tongue
seemed to find it difficult to move; some of his words were
almost unintelligible. It was clear that he was in the last
stage of emotional excitement. Maria Alexandrovna immediately
poured oil on the fire.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, Prince, I do believe you are falling in love with
my Zina,</q> she cried, feeling that the moment was a solemn
one.
</p>

<p>
The prince's reply surpassed her fondest expectations.
</p>

<p>
<q>I am madly in love with her!</q> cried the old man, all
animated, of a sudden. He was still on his knees, and he
trembled with excitement as he spoke. <q>I am ready to
give my life for her! And if only I could hope, if only I
might have a little hope&mdash;I,&mdash;but, lift me up; I feel so weak.
I&mdash;if only she would give me the hope that I might offer
her my heart, I&mdash;she should sing ballads to me every day;
and I could look at her, and look and gaze and gaze at her.&mdash;&mdash;Oh,
my God! my God!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Prince, Prince! you are offering her your hand. You
want to take her from me, my Zina! my darling, my <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>ange</foreign>,
my own dear child, Zina! No, Zina, no, I can't let you go!
They must tear you from me, Zina. They must tear you
first from your mother's arms!</q>
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna sprang to her daughter, and caught
her up in a close embrace, conscious, withal, of serious
physical resistance on Zina's part. The fond mother was a
little overdoing it.
</p>

<p>
Zina felt this with all her soul, and she looked on at the
whole comedy with inexpressible loathing.
</p>

<p>
However, she held her tongue, and that was all the fond
mother required of her.
</p>

<p>
<q>She has refused nine men because she will not leave
me!</q> said Maria. <q>But this time, I fear&mdash;my heart tells
me that we are doomed to part! I noticed just now how
she looked at you, Prince. You have impressed her with
your aristocratic manner, with your refinement. Oh! Prince,
you are going to separate us&mdash;I feel it, I feel it!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I ad&mdash;ore her!</q> murmured the poor old man, still
trembling like an autumnal leaf.
</p>

<p>
<q>And you'll consent to leave your mother!</q> cried Maria
Alexandrovna, throwing herself upon her daughter once
more. Zina made haste to bring this, to her, painful
scene to an end. She stretched her pretty hand silently to
the prince, and even forced herself to smile. The prince
reverently took the little hand into his own, and covered it
with kisses.
</p>

<p>
<q>I am only this mo&mdash;ment beginning to live,</q> he mutterred,
in a voice that seemed choking with rapture and
ecstasy.
</p>

<p>
<q>Zina,</q> began Maria Alexandrovna, solemnly, <q>look well
at this man! This is the most honest and upright and noble
man of all the men I know. He is a knight of the middle
ages! But she knows it, Prince, she knows it too well; to
my grief I say it. Oh! why did you come here? I am
surrendering my treasure to you&mdash;my angel! Oh! take care
of her, Prince. Her mother entreats you to watch over her.
And what mother could blame my grief!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Enough, mamma! that's enough,</q> said Zina, quietly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Protect her from all hurt and insult, Prince! Can I
rely upon your sword to flash in the face of the vile scandal-monger
who dares to offend my Zina?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Enough, mother, I tell you! am I&mdash;&mdash;?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, ye&mdash;yes, it shall flash all right,</q> said the
prince. <q>But I want to be married now, at once. I&mdash;I'm
only just learning what it is to live. I want to send off to
Donchanovo at once. I want to send for some di&mdash;iamonds
I have there. I want to lay them at her feet.&mdash;&mdash;I&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What noble ardour! what ecstasy of love! what noble,
generous feelings you have, Prince!</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna.
<q>And you could bury yourself&mdash;<emph>bury</emph> yourself, far
from the world and society! I shall remind you of this a
thousand times! I go mad when I think of that <emph>hellish</emph>
woman.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What could I do? I was fri&mdash;ghtened!</q> stammered the
prince in a whining voice: <q>they wanted to put me in a
lu&mdash;unatic asylum! I was dreadfully alarmed!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In a lunatic asylum? Ah, the scoundrels! oh, the inhuman
wretches! Ah, the low cunning of them! Yes,
Prince; I had heard of it. But the lunacy was in these
people, not in <emph>you</emph>. Why, <emph>why</emph> was it&mdash;what for?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I don't know myself, what it was for,</q> replied the
poor old man, feebly sinking into his chair; <q>I was at a
ball, don't you know, and told some an&mdash;ecdote or other
and they didn't like it; and so they got up a scandal and a
ro&mdash;ow.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Surely that was not all, Prince?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No;&mdash;the&mdash;I was playing cards with Prince Paul
De&mdash;mentieff, and I was cleared out: you see, I had two
kings and three quee&mdash;ns, three kings and two qu&mdash;eens;
or I should say&mdash;one king&mdash;and some queens&mdash;I know I
had&mdash;&mdash;.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And it was for this? Oh, the hellish inhumanity of some
people! You are weeping, Prince; but be of good cheer&mdash;it
is all over now! Now I shall be at hand, dearest Prince,&mdash;I
shall not leave Zina; and we shall see which of them will
dare to say a word to you, <emph>then</emph>! And do you know, my
Prince, your marriage will expose them! it will shame
them! They will see that you are a man&mdash;that a lovely girl
like our Zina would never have married a madman! You
shall raise your head proudly now, and look them straight
in the face!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes; I shall look them straight in the f&mdash;ace!</q>
murmured the prince, slowly shutting his eyes.
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna saw that her work was done: the
prince was tired out with love and emotion. She was only
wasting her eloquence!
</p>

<p>
<q>Prince, you are disturbed and tired, I see you are!</q>
she said; <q>you must rest, you must take a good rest after
so much agitation,</q> she added, bending over him maternally.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, ye&mdash;yes; I should like to lie down a little,</q>
said the old man.
</p>

<p>
<q>Of course, of course! you must lie down! those agitating
scenes&mdash;&mdash;stop, I will escort you myself, and arrange
your couch with my own hands! Why are you looking so
hard at that portrait, Prince? That is my mother's picture;
she was an angel&mdash;not a woman! Oh, why is she not
among us at this joyful moment!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes; charming&mdash;charming! Do you know, I had
a mother too,&mdash;a princess, and imagine! a re&mdash;markably,
a re&mdash;markably fat woman she was; but that is not what I
was going to say,&mdash;&mdash;I&mdash;I feel a little weak, and&mdash;&mdash;Au
revoir, my charming child&mdash;to-morrow&mdash;to-day&mdash;I will&mdash;I&mdash;I&mdash;Au
revoir, au revoir!</q> Here the poor old fellow
tried to kiss his hand, but slipped, and nearly fell over the
threshold of the door.
</p>

<p>
<q>Take care, dear Prince&mdash;take care! lean on my arm!</q>
cried Maria Alexandrovna.
</p>

<p>
<q>Charming, ch&mdash;arming!</q> he muttered, as he left the
room. <q>I am only now le&mdash;learning to live!</q>
</p>

<p>
Zina was left alone.
</p>

<p>
A terrible oppression weighed down her heart. She felt
a sensation of loathing which nearly suffocated her. She
despised herself&mdash;her cheeks burned. With folded hands,
and teeth biting hard into her lips, she stood in one spot,
motionless. The tears of shame streamed from her eyes,&mdash;&mdash;and
at this moment the door opened, and Paul
Mosgliakoff entered the room!
</p>


</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER IX.</head>

<p>
He had heard all&mdash;<emph>all</emph>.
</p>

<p>
He did not actually enter the room, but stood at the
door, pale with excitement and fury. Zina looked at him
in amazement.
</p>

<p>
<q>So that's the sort of person you are!</q> he cried panting.
<q>At last I have found you out, have I?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Found me out?</q> repeated Zina, looking at him as
though he were a madman. Suddenly her eyes flashed
with rage. <q>How dare you address me like that?</q> she
cried, advancing towards him.
</p>

<p>
<q>I have heard all!</q> said Mosgliakoff solemnly, but involuntarily
taking a step backwards.
</p>

<p>
<q>You heard? I see&mdash;you have been eavesdropping!</q>
cried Zina, looking at him with disdain.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, I have been eavesdropping! Yes&mdash;I consented
to do a mean action, and my reward is that I have found
out that you, too, are&mdash;&mdash;I don't know how to express
to you what I think you!</q> he replied, looking more and
more timid under Zina's eyes.
</p>

<p>
<q>And supposing that you <emph>have</emph> heard all: what right
have you to blame me? What right have you to speak to
me so insolently, in any case?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><emph>I!</emph>&mdash;<emph>I?</emph> what right have <emph>I</emph>? and <emph>you</emph> can ask me this?
You are going to marry this prince, and I have no right to
say a word! Why, you gave me your promise&mdash;is that
nothing?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>When?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How, when?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Did not I tell you that morning, when you came to me
with your sentimental nonsense&mdash;did I not tell you that I
could give you no decided answer?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But you did not reject me; you did not send me away.
I see&mdash;you kept me hanging in reserve, in case of need!
You lured me into your net! I see, I see it all!</q>
</p>

<p>
An expression of pain flitted over Zina's careworn face,
as though someone had suddenly stabbed her to the heart;
but she mastered her feelings.
</p>

<p>
<q>If I didn't turn you out of the house,</q> she began deliberately
and very clearly, though her voice had a scarcely
perceptible tremor in it, <q>I refrained from such a course
purely out of pity. You begged me yourself to postpone, to
give you time, not to say you <q>No,</q> to study you better, and
<q>then,</q> you said, <q>then, when you know what a fine fellow I
am, perhaps you will not refuse me!</q> These were your own
words, or very like them, at the very beginning of your
courtship!&mdash;you cannot deny them! And now you dare to
tell me that I <q>lured you into my net,</q> just as though you
did not notice my expression of loathing when you made
your appearance this morning! You came a fortnight
sooner than I expected you, and I did not hide my disgust;
on the contrary, I made it evident&mdash;you must have noticed
it&mdash;I know you did; because you asked me whether I was
angry because you had come sooner than you promised!
Let me tell you that people who do not, and do not <emph>care</emph> to,
hide their loathing for a man can hardly be accused of
luring that man into their net! You dare to tell me that I
was keeping you in reserve! Very well; my answer to that
is, that I judged of you like this: <q>Though he may not be
endowed with much intellect, still he may turn out to be a
good enough fellow; and if so, it might be possible to
marry him.</q> However, being persuaded, now, that you are
a fool, and a <emph>mischievous</emph> fool into the bargain,&mdash;having
found out this fact, to my great joy,&mdash;it only remains for me
now to wish you every happiness and a pleasant journey.
Good-bye!</q>
</p>

<p>
With these words Zina turned her back on him, and deliberately
made for the door.
</p>

<p>
Mosgliakoff, seeing that all was lost, boiled over with
fury.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! so I'm a fool!</q> he yelled; <q>I'm a fool, am I?
Very well, good-bye! But before I go, the whole town shall
know of this! They shall all hear how you and your
mother made the old man drunk, and then swindled him!
I shall let the whole world know it! You shall see what
Mosgliakoff can do!</q>
</p>

<p>
Zina trembled and stopped, as though to answer; but on
reflection, she contented herself by shrugging her shoulders;
glanced contemptuously at Mosgliakoff, and left the room,
banging the door after her.
</p>

<p>
At this moment Maria Alexandrovna made her appearance.
She heard Mosgliakoff's exclamation, and, divining
at once what had happened, trembled with terror.
Mosgliakoff still in the house, and near the prince!
Mosgliakoff about to spread the news all over the town!
At this moment, when secrecy, if only for a short time, was
essential! But Maria Alexandrovna was quick at calculations:
she thought, with an eagle flight of the mind, over all
the circumstances of the case, and her plan for the pacification
of Mosgliakoff was ready in an instant!
</p>

<p>
<q>What is it, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mon ami</foreign>?</q> she said, entering the room,
and holding out her hand to him with friendly warmth.
</p>

<p>
<q>How&mdash;<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mon ami</foreign>?</q></q> cried the enraged Mosgliakoff.
<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Mon ami</foreign>, indeed! the moment after you have abused
and reviled me like a pickpocket! No, no! Not quite
so green, my good lady! I'm not to be so easily imposed
upon again!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I am sorry, extremely sorry, to see you in such a <emph>strange</emph>
condition of mind, Paul Alexandrovitch! What expressions
you use! You do not take the trouble to choose
your words before ladies&mdash;oh, fie!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Before ladies? Ho ho! You&mdash;you are&mdash;you are anything
you like&mdash;but not a lady!</q> yelled Mosgliakoff.
</p>

<p>
I don't quite know what he meant, but it was something
very terrible, you may be sure!
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna looked benignly in his face:
</p>

<p>
<q>Sit down!</q> she said, sorrowfully, showing him a chair,
the same that the old prince had reclined in a quarter of
an hour before.
</p>

<p>
<q>But listen, <emph>will</emph> you listen, Maria Alexandrovna? You
look at me just as though you were not the least to blame;
in fact, as though <emph>I</emph> were the guilty party! Really, Maria
Alexandrovna, this is a little <emph>too</emph> much of a good thing!
No human being can stand that sort of thing, Maria
Alexandrovna! You must be aware of that fact!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>My dear friend,</q> replied Maria Alexandrovna&mdash;<q>you
will allow me to continue to call you by that name, for you
have no better friend than I am!&mdash;my friend, you are
suffering&mdash;you are amazed and bewildered; your heart is
sore, and therefore the tone of your remarks to me is
perhaps not surprising. But I have made up my mind to
open my heart to you, especially as I am, perhaps, in some
degree to blame before you. Sit down; let us talk it
over!</q>
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna's voice was tender to a sickly
extent. Her face showed the pain she was suffering. The
amazed Mosgliakoff sat down beside her in the arm-chair.
</p>

<p>
<q>You hid somewhere, and listened, I suppose?</q> she
began, looking reproachfully into his face.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes I did, of course I did; and a good thing too!
What a fool I should have looked if I hadn't! At all
events now I know what you have been plotting against
me!</q> replied the injured man, rudely; encouraging and
supporting himself by his own fury.
</p>

<p>
<q>And you&mdash;and you&mdash;with your principles, and with your
bringing up, could condescend to such an action&mdash;Oh, oh!</q>
</p>

<p>
Mosgliakoff jumped up.
</p>

<p>
<q>Maria Alexandrovna, this is a little too much!</q> he
cried. <q>Consider what <emph>you</emph> condescend to do, with <emph>your</emph>
principles, and <emph>then</emph> judge of other people.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>One more question,</q> she continued, without replying
to his outburst: <q>who recommended you to be an eavesdropper;
who told you anything; who is the spy here?
That's what I wish to know!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, excuse me; that I shall <emph>not</emph> tell you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well; I know already. I said, Paul, that I was
in some degree to blame before you. But if you look into
the matter you will find that if I am to blame it is solely in
consequence of my anxiety to do you a good turn!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><emph>What?</emph> a good turn&mdash;<emph>me</emph>? No, no, madam! I
assure you I am not to be caught again! I'm not quite
such a fool!</q>
</p>

<p>
He moved so violently in his arm-chair that it shook
again.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Now, do be cool, if you can, my good friend. Listen
to me attentively, and you will find that what I say is only
the bare truth. In the first place I was anxious to inform
you of all that has just taken place, in which case you
would have learned everything, down to the smallest detail,
without being obliged to descend to eavesdropping! If I
did not tell you all before, it was simply because the whole
matter was in an embryo condition in my mind. It was
then quite possible that what <emph>has</emph> happened would never
happen. You see, I am quite open with you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In the second place, do not blame my daughter. She
loves you to distraction; and it was only by the exercise of my
utmost influence that I persuaded her to drop you, and
accept the prince's offer.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have just had the pleasure of receiving convincing
proof of her <q>love to distraction!</q></q> remarked Mosgliakoff,
ironically and bitterly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well. But how did you speak to <emph>her</emph>? As a
lover should speak? Again, ought <emph>any</emph> man of respectable
position and tone to speak like that? You insulted and
wounded her!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Never mind about my <q>tone</q> now! All I can say is
that this morning, when I went away with the prince, in
spite of both of you having been as sweet as honey to me
before, you reviled me behind my back like a pickpocket!
<emph>I</emph> know all about it, you see!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, from the same dirty source, I suppose?</q> said
Maria Alexandrovna, smiling disdainfully. <q>Yes, Paul, I
<emph>did</emph> revile you: I pitched into you considerably, and
I admit it frankly. But it was simply that I was <emph>bound</emph>
to blacken you before her. Why? Because, as I have
said, I required her to consent to leave you, and this consent
was so difficult to tear from her! Short-sighted
man that you are! If she had not loved you, why should
I have required so to blacken your character? Why should
I have been obliged to take this extreme step? Oh! you
don't know all! I was forced to use my fullest maternal
authority in order to erase you from her heart; and with
all my influence and skill I only succeeded in erasing your
dear image superficially and partially! If you saw and
heard all just now, it cannot have escaped you that Zina
did not once, by either word or gesture, encourage or
confirm my words to the prince? Throughout the whole
scene she said not one word. She sang, but like an
automaton! Her whole soul was in anguish, and at last,
out of pity for her, I took the prince away. I am sure,
she cried, when I left her alone! When you entered the
room you must have observed tears in her eyes?</q>
</p>

<p>
Mosgliakoff certainly did recall the fact that when he
rushed into the room Zina was crying.
</p>

<p>
<q>But you&mdash;<emph>you</emph>&mdash;why were <emph>you</emph> so against me, Maria
Alexandrovna?</q> he cried. <q>Why did you revile me and
malign me, as you admit you did?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah, now that's quite a different question. Now, if you
had only asked me reasonably at the beginning, you should
have had your answer long ago! Yes, you are right. It
was I, and I alone, who did it all. Do not think of Zina
in the matter. Now, <emph>why</emph> did I do it? I reply, in the first
place, for Zina's sake. The prince is rich, influential, has
great connections, and in marrying him Zina will make a
brilliant match. Very well; then if the prince dies&mdash;as
perhaps he will die soon, for we are all mortal,&mdash;Zina is still
young, a widow, a princess, and probably very rich. Then
she can marry whom she pleases; she may make another
brilliant match if she likes. But of course she will marry
the man she loves, and loved before, the man whose heart
she wounded by accepting the prince. Remorse alone
would be enough to make her marry the man whom she had
loved and so deeply injured!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Hem!</q> said Paul, gazing at his boots thoughtfully.
</p>

<p>
<q>In the second place,</q> continued Maria, <q>and I will
put this shortly, because, though you read a great deal of
your beloved Shakespeare, and extract his finest thoughts
and ideals, yet you are very young, and cannot, perhaps,
apply what you read. You may not understand my feelings
in this matter: listen, however. <emph>I</emph> am giving my Zina to
this prince partly for the prince's own sake, because I wish
to save him by this marriage. We are old friends; he is the
dearest and best of men, he is a knightly, chivalrous gentleman,
and he lives helpless and miserable in the claws of that
devil of a woman at Donchanovo! Heaven knows that I
persuaded Zina into this marriage by putting it to her that
she would be performing a great and noble action. I represented
her as being the stay and the comfort and the darling
and the idol of a poor old man, who probably would not live
another year at the most! I showed her that thus his last
days should be made happy with love and light and friendship,
instead of wretched with fear and the society of a
detestable woman. Oh! do not blame Zina. She is guiltless.
I am not&mdash;I admit it; for if there have been calculations
it is I who have made them! But I calculated for
her, Paul; for her, not myself! I have outlived my time;
I have thought but for my child, and what mother could
blame me for this?</q> Tears sparkled in the fond mother's
eyes. Mosgliakoff listened in amazement to all this eloquence,
winking his eyes in bewilderment.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, yes, of course! You talk well, Maria Alexandrovna,
but you forget&mdash;you gave me your word, you encouraged
me, you gave me my hopes; and where am I now? I have
to stand aside and look a fool!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But, my dear Paul, you don't surely suppose that I have
not thought of you too! Don't you see the huge, immeasurable
gain to yourself in all this? A gain so vast that
I was bound in your interest to act as I did!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Gain for me! How so?</q> asked Paul, in the most
abject state of confusion and bewilderment.
</p>

<p>
<q>Gracious Heavens! do you mean to say you are really
so simple and so short-sighted as to be unable to see <emph>that</emph>?</q>
cried Maria Alexandrovna, raising her eyes to the ceiling in
a pious manner. <q>Oh! youth, youth! That's what comes
of steeping one's soul in Shakespeare! You ask me, my
dear friend Paul, where is the gain to you in all this. Allow
me to make a little digression. Zina loves you&mdash;that is an
undoubted fact. But I have observed that at the same time,
and in spite of her evident love, she is not quite sure of
your good feeling and devotion to her; and for this reason
she is sometimes cold and self-restrained in your presence.
Have you never observed this yourself, Paul?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Certainly; I did this very day; but go on, what do you
deduce from that fact?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There, you see! you have observed it yourself; then of
course I am right. She is not quite sure of the <emph>lasting</emph>
quality of your feeling for her! I am a mother, and I may
be permitted to read the heart of my child. Now, then,
supposing that instead of rushing into the room and reproaching,
vilifying, even <emph>swearing</emph> at and insulting this
sweet, pure, beautiful, proud being, instead of hurling contempt
and vituperation at her head&mdash;supposing that instead
of all this you had received the bad news with composure,
with tears of grief, maybe; perhaps even with despair&mdash;but
at the same time with noble composure of soul&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>H'm!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, no&mdash;don't interrupt me! I wish to show you the picture
as it is. Very well, supposing, then, that you had come to her
and said, <q>Zina, I love you better than my life, but family
considerations must separate us; I understand these considerations&mdash;they
are devised for your greater happiness, and
I dare not oppose them. Zina, I forgive you; be happy,
if you can!</q>&mdash;think what effect such noble words would
have wrought upon her heart!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes&mdash;yes, that's all very true, I quite understand
that much! but if I <emph>had</emph> said all this, I should have had
to go all the same, without satisfaction!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>No, no, no! don't interrupt me! I wish to show you the
<emph>whole</emph> picture in all its detail, in order to impress you fully
and satisfactorily. Very well, then, imagine now that you
meet her in society some time afterwards: you meet perhaps
at a ball&mdash;in the brilliant light of a ball-room, under
the soothing strains of music, and in the midst of worldly
women and of all that is gay and beautiful. You alone are
sad&mdash;thoughtful&mdash;pale,&mdash;you lean against some pillar (where
you are visible, however!) and watch her. She is dancing.
You hear the strains of Strauss, and the wit and merriment
around you, but you are sad and wretched.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What, think you, will Zina make of it? With what sort
of eyes will she gaze on you as you stand there? <q>And I
could doubt this man!</q> she will think, <q>this man who
sacrificed all, all, for my sake&mdash;even to the mortal wounding
of his heart!</q> Of course the old love will awake in her
bosom and will swell with irresistible power!</q>
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna stopped to take breath. Paul moved
violently from side to side of his chair.
</p>

<p>
<q>Zina now goes abroad for the benefit of the prince's
health&mdash;to Italy&mdash;to Spain,</q> she continued, <q>where the
myrtle and the lemon tree grow, where the sky is so blue,
the beautiful Guadalquiver flows! to the land of love,
where none can live without loving; where roses and kisses&mdash;so
to speak&mdash;breathe in the very air around. You follow
her&mdash;you sacrifice your business, friends, everything, and
follow her. And so your love grows and increases with
irresistible might. Of course that love is irreproachable&mdash;innocent&mdash;you
will languish for one another&mdash;you
will meet frequently; of course others will
malign and vilify you both, and call your love
by baser names&mdash;but your love is innocent, as I have
purposely said; I am her mother&mdash;it is not for me to teach
you evil, but good. At all events the prince is not in the
condition to keep a very sharp look-out upon you; but if he
did, as if there would be the slightest ground for base
suspicion? Well, the prince dies at last, and then, who will
marry Zina, if not yourself? You are so distant a relative of
the prince's that there could be no obstacle to the match;
you marry her&mdash;she is young still, and rich. You are a
grandee in an instant! you, too, are rich now! I will take
care that the prince's will is made as it should be; and
lastly, Zina, now convinced of your loyalty and faithfulness,
will look on you hereafter as her hero, as her paragon of
virtue and self-sacrifice! Oh! you must be blind,&mdash;<emph>blind</emph>,
not to observe and calculate your own profit when it lies
but a couple of strides from you, grinning at you, as it were,
and saying, <q>Here, I am yours, take me! Oh, Paul, Paul!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Maria Alexandrovna!</q> cried Mosgliakoff, in great agitation
and excitement, <q>I see it all! I have been rude, and a
fool, and a scoundrel too!</q> He jumped up from his chair
and tore his hair.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, and unbusinesslike, that's the chief thing&mdash;unbusinesslike,
and blindly so!</q> added Maria Alexandrovna.
</p>

<p>
<q>I'm an ass! Maria Alexandrovna,</q> he cried in despair.
<q>All is lost now, and I loved her to madness!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Maybe all is not lost yet!</q> said this successful orator
softly, and as though thinking out some idea.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! if only it could be so! help me&mdash;teach me.
Oh! save me, save me!</q>
</p>

<p>
Mosgliakoff burst into tears.
</p>

<p>
<q>My dear boy,</q> said Maria Alexandrovna, sympathetically,
and holding out her hand, <q>you acted impulsively,
from the depth and heat of your passion&mdash;in fact, out
of your great love for her; you were in despair, you had
forgotten yourself; she must understand all that!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! I love her madly! I am ready to sacrifice everything
for her!</q> cried Mosgliakoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>Listen! I will justify you before her.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, Maria Alexandrovna!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, I will. I take it upon myself! You come with me,
and you shall tell her exactly what I said!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, how kind, how good you are! Can't we go at once,
Maria Alexandrovna?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Goodness gracious, no! What a very green hand you are,
Paul! She's far too proud! she would take it as a new rudeness
and impertinence! To-morrow I shall arrange it all
comfortably for you: but now, couldn't you get out of the
way somewhere for a while, to that godfather of yours, for
instance? You could come back in the evening, if you
pleased; but my advice would be to stay away!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, yes! I'll go&mdash;of course! Good heavens, you've
made a man of me again!&mdash;Well, but look here&mdash;one more
question:&mdash;What if the prince does <emph>not</emph> die so soon?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, my dear boy, how delightfully na&iuml;ve you are! On
the contrary, we must pray for his good health! We must
wish with all our hearts for long life to this dear, good, and
chivalrous old man! I shall be the first to pray day and
night for the happiness of my beloved daughter! But alas!
I fear the prince's case is hopeless; you see, they must visit
the capital now, to bring Zina out into society.&mdash;I dreadfully
fear that all this may prove fatal to him; however, we'll pray,
Paul, we can't do more, and the rest is in the hands of a
kind Providence. You see what I mean? Very well&mdash;good-bye,
my dear boy, bless you! Be a man, and wait patiently&mdash;be
a man, that's the chief thing! I never doubted your
generosity of character; but be brave&mdash;good-bye!</q> She
pressed his hand warmly, and Mosgliakoff walked out of the
room on tip-toes.
</p>

<p>
<q>There goes <emph>one</emph> fool, got rid of satisfactorily!</q> observed
Maria Alexandrovna to herself,&mdash;<q>but there are more
behind&mdash;&mdash;!</q>
</p>

<p>
At this moment the door opened, and Zina entered the
room. She was paler than usual, and her eyes were all
ablaze.
</p>

<p>
<q>Mamma!</q> she said, <q>be quick about this business, or
I shall not be able to hold out. It is all so dirty and mean
that I feel I must run out of the house if it goes on. Don't
drive me to desperation! I warn you&mdash;don't weary me out&mdash;don't
weary me out!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Zina&mdash;what is it, my darling? You&mdash;you've been
listening?</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna, gazing intently and
anxiously at her daughter.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, I have; but you need not try to make me ashamed
of myself as you succeeded in doing with that fool. Now
listen: I solemnly swear that if you worry and annoy me
by making me play various mean and odious parts in this
comedy of yours,&mdash;I swear to you that I will throw up the
whole business and put an end to it in a moment. It is
quite enough that I have consented to be a party in the
main and essence of the base transactions; but&mdash;but&mdash;I did
not know myself, I am poisoned and suffocated with the
stench of it!</q>&mdash;So saying, she left the room and banged
the door after her.
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna looked fixedly after her for a moment,
and reflected.
</p>

<p>
<q>I must make haste,</q> she cried, rousing herself; <q><emph>she</emph>
is the greatest danger and difficulty of all! If these detestable
people do not let us alone, instead of acting the town-criers
all over the place (as I fear they are doing already!)&mdash;all
will be lost! She won't stand the worry of it&mdash;she'll
drop the business altogether!&mdash;At all hazards, I must get
the prince to the country house, and that quickly, too! I
shall be off there at once, first, and bring my fool of a husband
up: he shall be made useful for once in his life! Meanwhile
the prince shall have his sleep out, and when he wakes
up I shall be back and ready to cart him away bodily!</q>
</p>

<p>
She rang the bell.
</p>

<p>
<q>Are the horses ready?</q> she inquired of the man.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, madam, long ago!</q> said the latter.
</p>

<p>
She had ordered the carriage the moment after she had
taken the prince upstairs.
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna dressed hurriedly, and then looked
in at Zina's room for a moment, before starting, in order to
tell her the outlines of her plan of operations, and at the
same time to give Zina a few necessary instructions. But
her daughter could not listen to her. She was lying on her
bed with face hidden in the pillows, crying, and was tearing
her beautiful hair with her long white hands: occasionally
she trembled violently for a moment, as though a blast of
cold had passed through all her veins. Her mother began
to speak to her, but Zina did not even raise her head!
</p>

<p>
Having stood over her daughter in a state of bewilderment
for some little while, Maria Alexandrovna left the
room; and to make up for lost time bade the coachman
drive like fury, as she stepped into the carriage.
</p>

<p>
<q>I don't quite like Zina having listened!</q> she thought as
she rattled away. <q>I gave Mosgliakoff very much the same
argument as to herself: she is proud, and may easily have
taken offence! H'm! Well, the great thing is to be in
time with all the arrangements,&mdash;before people know what
I am up to! Good heavens, fancy, if my fool of a husband
were to be out!!</q>
</p>

<p>
And at the very thought of such a thing, Maria Alexandrovna's
rage so overcame her that it was clear her poor
husband would fare badly for his sins if he proved to be
not at home! She twisted and turned in her place with
impatience,&mdash;the horses almost galloped with the carriage
at their heels.
</p>


</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER X.</head>

<p>
On they flew.
</p>

<p>
I have said already that this very day, on her first drive
after the prince, Maria Alexandrovna had been inspired
with a great idea! and I promised to reveal this idea in its
proper place. But I am sure the reader has guessed it
already!&mdash;It was, to <q>confiscate</q> the prince in her turn,
and carry him off to the village where, at this moment, her
husband Afanassy Matveyevitch vegetated alone.
</p>

<p>
I must admit that our heroine was growing more and more
anxious as the day went on; but this is often the case with
heroes of all kinds, just before they attain their great ends!
Some such instinct whispered to her that it was not safe to
remain in Mordasoff another hour, if it could be avoided;&mdash;but
once in the country house, the whole town might go
mad and stand on its head, for all she cared!
</p>

<p>
Of course she must not lose time, even there! All sorts
of things might happen&mdash;even the police might interfere.
(Reader, I shall never believe, for my part, that my heroine
really had the slightest fear of the vulgar police force; but
as it has been rumoured in Mordasoff that at this moment
such a thought <emph>did</emph> pass through her brain, why, I must
record the fact.)
</p>

<p>
In a word she saw clearly that Zina's marriage with the
prince must be brought about at once, without delay! It
was easily done: the priest at the village should perform
the ceremony; why not the day after to-morrow? or
indeed, in case of need, to-morrow? Marriages had often
been brought about in less time than this&mdash;in two hours, she
had heard! It would be easy enough to persuade the
prince that haste and simplicity would be in far better taste
than all the usual pomps and vanities of common everyday
weddings. In fact, she relied upon her skill in putting the
matter to the old man as a fitting dramatic issue to a
romantic story of love, and thus to touch the most sensitive
string of his chivalrous heart.
</p>

<p>
In case of absolute need there was always the possibility
of making him drunk, or rather of <emph>keeping</emph> him perpetually
drunk. And then, come what might, Zina would be a
princess! And if this marriage were fated to produce
scandal among the prince's relations and friends in St.
Petersburg and Moscow, Maria Alexandrovna comforted
herself with the reflection that marriages in high life nearly
always <emph>were</emph> productive of scandal; and that such a result
might fairly be looked upon as <q>good form,</q> and as peculiar
to aristocratic circles.
</p>

<p>
Besides, she felt sure that Zina need only show herself
in society, with her mamma to support her, and every one
of all those countesses and princes should very soon either
acknowledge her of their own accord, or yield to the head-washing
that Maria Alexandrovna felt herself so competent
to give to any or all of them, individually or collectively.
</p>

<p>
It was in consequence of these reflections that Maria
Alexandrovna was now hastening with all speed towards
her village, in order to bring back Afanassy Matveyevitch,
whose presence she considered absolutely necessary at this
crisis. It was desirable that her husband should appear and
invite the prince down to the country: she relied upon the
appearance of the father of the family, in dress-coat and
white tie, hastening up to town on the first rumours of the
prince's arrival there, to produce a very favourable impression
upon the old man's self-respect: it would flatter him;
and after such a courteous action, followed by a polite and
warmly-couched invitation to the country, the prince would
hardly refuse to go.
</p>

<p>
At last the carriage stopped at the door of a long low
wooden house, surrounded by old lime trees. This was the
country house, Maria Alexandrovna's village residence.
</p>

<p>
Lights were burning inside.
</p>

<p>
<q>Where's my old fool?</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna
bursting like a hurricane into the sitting-room.
</p>

<p>
<q>Whats this towel lying here for?&mdash;Oh!&mdash;he's been
wiping his head, has he. What, the baths again! and tea&mdash;of
course tea!&mdash;always tea! Well, what are you winking
your eyes at me for, you old fool?&mdash;Here, why is his hair not
cropped? Grisha, Grisha!&mdash;here; why didn't you cut
your master's hair, as I told you?</q>
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna, on entering the room, had intended
to greet her husband more kindly than this; but seeing
that he had just been to the baths and that he was drinking
tea with great satisfaction, as usual, she could not restrain
her irritable feelings.
</p>

<p>
She felt the contrast between her own activity and
intellectual energy, and the stolid indifference and sheep-like
contentedness of her husband, and it went to her heart!
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the <q>old fool,</q> or to put it more politely, he who
had been addressed by that title, sat at the tea-urn, and
stared with open mouth, in abject alarm, opening and
shutting his lips as he gazed at the wife of his bosom,
who had almost petrified him by her sudden appearance.
</p>

<p>
At the door stood the sleepy, fat Grisha, looking on at
the scene, and blinking both eyes at periodical intervals.
</p>

<p>
<q>I couldn't cut his hair as you wished, because he
wouldn't let me!</q> he growled at last. <q><q>You'd better let
me do it!</q>&mdash;I said, <q>or the mistress'll be down one of these
days, and then we shall both catch it!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No,</q> he says, <q>I want it like this now, and you shall
cut it on Sunday. I like it long!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What!&mdash;So you wish to curl it without my leave, do
you! What an idea&mdash;as if you could wear curls with your
sheep-face underneath! Good gracious, what a mess you've
made of the place; and what's the smell&mdash;what have you
been doing, idiot, eh!</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna, waxing
more and more angry, and turning furiously upon the
wretched and perfectly innocent Afanassy!
</p>

<p>
<q>Mam&mdash;mammy!</q> muttered the poor frightened master
of the house, gazing with frightened eyes at the mistress, and
blinking with all his might&mdash;<q>mammy!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How many times have I dinned into your stupid head
that I am <emph>not</emph> your <q>mammy.</q> How can I be your
mammy, you idiotic pigmy? How dare you call a noble
lady by such a name; a lady whose proper place is in the
highest circles, not beside an ass like yourself!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes&mdash;yes,&mdash;but&mdash;but, you <emph>are</emph> my legal wife, you know,
after all;&mdash;so I&mdash;it was husbandly affection you know&mdash;&mdash;</q>
murmured poor Afanassy, raising both hands to his head as
he spoke, to defend his hair from the tugs he evidently
expected.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, idiot that you are! did anyone ever hear such a
ridiculous answer as that&mdash;legal wife, indeed! Who ever
heard the expression <q><emph>legal</emph> wife,</q> in good society&mdash;nasty
low expression! And how dare you remind me that I am
your wife, when I use all my power and do all I possibly
can at every moment to forget the fact, eh? What are
you covering your head with your hands for? Look at his
hair&mdash;now: wet, as wet as reeds! it will take three hours to
dry that head! How on earth am I to take him like this?
How can he show his face among respectable people?
What am I to do?</q>
</p>

<p>
And Maria Alexandrovna bit her finger-nails with rage as
she walked furiously up and down the room.
</p>

<p>
It was no very great matter, of course; and one that was
easily set right; but Maria Alexandrovna required a vent
for her feelings and felt the need of emptying out her
accumulated wrath upon the head of the wretched Afanassy
Matveyevitch; for tyranny is a habit recallable at need.
</p>

<p>
Besides, everyone knows how great a contrast there is
between the sweetness and refinement shown by many
ladies of a certain class on the stage, as it were, of society
life, and the revelations of character behind the scenes at
home; and I was anxious to bring out this contrast for my
reader's benefit.
</p>

<p>
Afanassy watched the movements of his terrible spouse
in fear and trembling; perspiration formed upon his brow
as he gazed.
</p>

<p>
<q>Grisha!</q> she cried at last, <q>dress your master this
instant! Dress-coat, black trousers, white waistcoat and
tie, quick! Where's his hairbrush&mdash;quick, quick!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Mam&mdash;my! Why, I've just been to the bath. I shall
catch cold if I go up to town just now!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You won't catch cold!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But&mdash;mammy, my hair's quite wet!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>We'll dry it in a minute. Here, Grisha, take this brush
and brush away till he's dry,&mdash;harder&mdash;harder&mdash;much
harder! There, that's better!</q>
</p>

<p>
Grisha worked like a man. For the greater convenience
of his herculean task he seized his master's shoulder with
one hand as he rubbed violently with the other. Poor
Afanassy grunted and groaned and almost wept.
</p>

<p>
<q>Now, then, lift him up a bit. Where's the pomatum?
Bend your head, duffer!&mdash;bend lower, you abject dummy!</q>
And Maria Alexandrovna herself undertook to pomade her
husband's hair, ploughing her hands through it without the
slightest pity. Afanassy heartily wished that his shock
growth had been cut. He winced, and groaned and
moaned, but did not cry out under the painful operation.
</p>

<p>
<q>You suck my life-blood out of me&mdash;bend lower, you
idiot!</q> remarked the fond wife&mdash;<q>bend lower still, I
tell you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How have I sucked your life blood?</q> asked the victim,
bending his head as low as circumstances permitted.
</p>

<p>
<q>Fool!&mdash;allegorically, of course&mdash;can't you understand?
Now, then, comb it yourself. Here, Grisha, dress
him, quick!</q>
</p>

<p>
Our heroine threw herself into an arm-chair, and critically
watched the ceremony of adorning her husband. Meanwhile
the latter had a little opportunity to get his breath
once more and compose his feelings generally; so that when
matters arrived at the point where the tie is tied, he had
even developed so much audacity as to express opinions of
his own as to how the bow should be manufactured.
</p>

<p>
At last, having put his dress-coat on, the lord of the
manor was his brave self again, and gazed at his highly
ornate person in the glass with great satisfaction and
complacency.
</p>

<p>
<q>Where are you going to take me to?</q> he now asked,
smiling at his reflected self.
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna could not believe her ears.
</p>

<p>
<q>What&mdash;<emph>what</emph>? How <emph>dare</emph> you ask me where I am
taking you to, sir!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But&mdash;mammy&mdash;I must know, you know&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Hold your tongue! You let me hear you call me
mammy again, especially where we are going to now! you
sha'n't have any tea for a month!</q>
</p>

<p>
The frightened consort held his peace.
</p>

<p>
<q>Look at that, now! You haven't got a single 'order'
to put on&mdash;sloven!</q> she continued, looking at his black
coat with contempt.
</p>

<p>
<q>The Government awards orders, mammy; and I am not
a sloven, but a town councillor!</q> said Afanassy, with a
sudden excess of noble wrath.
</p>

<p>
<q>What, what&mdash;<emph>what</emph>! So you've learned to argue now,
have you&mdash;you mongrel, you? However, I haven't time
to waste over you now, or I'd&mdash;&mdash;but I sha'n't forget it.
Here, Grisha, give him his fur coat and his hat&mdash;quick; and
look here, Grisha, when I'm gone, get these three rooms
ready, and the green room, and the corner bedroom.
Quick&mdash;find your broom; take the coverings off the looking-glasses
and clocks, and see that all is ready and tidy within
an hour. Put on a dress coat, and see that the other men
have gloves: don't lose time. Quick, now!</q>
</p>

<p>
She entered the carriage, followed by Afanassy. The
latter sat bewildered and lost.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile Maria Alexandrovna reflected as to how
best she could drum into her husband's thick skull certain
essential instructions with regard to the present situation
of affairs. But Afanassy anticipated her.
</p>

<p>
<q>I had a very original dream to-day, Maria Alexandrovna,</q>
he observed quite unexpectedly, in the middle of
a long silence.
</p>

<p>
<q>Tfu! idiot. I thought you were going to say something
of terrific interest, from the look of you. Dream, indeed!
How dare you mention your miserable dreams to me!
Original, too! Listen here: if you dare so much as remind
me of the word <q>dream,</q> or say anything else, either, where
we are going to-day, I&mdash;I don't know <emph>what</emph> I won't do to
you! Now, look here: Prince K. has arrived at my
house. Do you remember Prince K.?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, yes, mammy, I remember; and why has he done
us this honour?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Be quiet; that's not your business. Now, you are to
invite him, with all the amiability you can, to come down to
our house in the country, at once! That is what I am
taking you up for. And if you dare so much as breathe
another word of any kind, either to-day or to-morrow, or
next day, without leave from me, you shall herd geese for a
whole year. You're not to say a single word, mind! and
that's all you have to think of. Do you understand, now?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, but if I'm asked anything?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Hold your tongue all the same!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, but I can't do that&mdash;I can't do&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well, then; you can say <q>H'm,</q> or something of
that sort, to give them the idea that you are very wise
indeed, and like to think well before answering.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>H'm.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Understand me, now. I am taking you up because
you are to make it appear that you have just heard of the
prince's visit, and have hastened up to town in a transport of
joy to express your unbounded respect and gratitude to
him, and to invite him at once to your country house! Do
you understand me?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>H'm.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I don't want you to say <q>H'm</q> <emph>now</emph>, you fool! You
must answer <emph>me</emph> when I speak!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>All right&mdash;all right, mammy. All shall be as you
wish; but why am I to ask the prince down?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What&mdash;what! arguing again. What business is it of
yours <emph>why</emph> you are to invite him? How dare you ask
questions!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why it's all the same thing, mammy. How am I to
invite him if I must not say a word?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, I shall do all the talking. All you have to do is to
bow. Do you hear? <emph>Bow</emph>; and hold your hat in your
hand and look polite. Do you understand, or not?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I understand, mam&mdash;Maria-Alexandrovna.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The prince is very witty, indeed; so mind, if he says
anything either to yourself or anyone else, you are to laugh
cordially and merrily. Do you hear me?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>H'm.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't say <q>H'm</q> to <emph>me</emph>, I tell you. You are to answer
me plainly and simply. Do you hear me, or not?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, yes; I hear you, of course. That's all right. I
only say <q>H'm,</q> for practice; I want to get into the way of
saying it. But look here, mammy, it's all very well; you
say I'm not to speak, and if he speaks to me I'm to look at
him and laugh&mdash;but what if he asks me a question?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh&mdash;you dense log of a man! I tell you again, you
are to be quiet. <emph>I'll</emph> answer for you. You have simply got
to look polite, and smile!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But he'll think I am dumb!</q> said Afanassy.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, and what if he does. Let him! You'll conceal the
fact that you are a fool, anyhow!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>H'm, and if <emph>other</emph> people ask me questions?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No one will; there'll be no one to ask you. But if
there <emph>should</emph> be anyone else in the room, and they ask you
questions, all you have to do is to smile sarcastically. Do
you know what a sarcastic smile is?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What, a witty sort of smile, is it, mammy?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I'll let you know about it! <emph>Witty</emph>, indeed! Why, who
would think of expecting anything witty from a fool like
you. No, sir, a jesting smile&mdash;<emph>jesting</emph> and <emph>contemptuous</emph>!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>H'm.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Good heavens. I'm afraid for this idiot,</q> thought Maria
Alexandrovna to herself. <q>I really think it would have
been almost better to leave him behind, after all.</q> So
thinking, nervous and anxious, Maria Alexandrovna drove
on. She looked out of the window, and she fidgeted, and
she bustled the coachman up. The horses were almost
flying through the air; but to her they appeared to be
crawling. Afanassy sat silent and thoughtful in the corner
of the carriage, practising his lessons. At last the carriage
arrived at the town house.
</p>

<p>
Hardly, however, had Maria Alexandrovna mounted the
outer steps when she became aware of a fine pair of horses
trotting up&mdash;drawing a smart sledge with a hood to it. In
fact, the very <q>turn-out</q> in which Anna Nicolaevna
Antipova was generally to be seen.
</p>

<p>
Two ladies sat in the sledge. One of these was, of
course, Mrs. Antipova herself; the other was Natalia
Dimitrievna, of late the great friend and ally of the former
lady.
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna's heart sank.
</p>

<p>
But she had no time to say a word, before another smart
vehicle drove up, in which there reclined yet another guest.
Exclamations of joy and delight were now heard.
</p>

<p>
<q>Maria Alexandrovna! and Afanassy Matveyevitch! Just
arrived, too! Where from? How extremely delightful! And
here we are, you see, just driven up at the right moment.
We are going to spend the evening with you. What a
delightful surprise.</q>
</p>

<p>
The guests alighted and fluttered up the steps like so
many swallows.
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna could neither believe her eyes nor
her ears.
</p>

<p>
<q>Curse you all!</q> she said to herself. <q>This looks like
a plot&mdash;it must be seen to; but it takes more than a flight of
magpies like <emph>you</emph> to get to windward of <emph>me</emph>. Wait a little!!</q>
</p>


</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XI.</head>

<p>
Mosgliakoff went out from Maria Alexandrovna's house
to all appearances quite pacified. She had fired his ardour
completely. His imagination was kindled.
</p>

<p>
He did not go to his godfather's, for he felt the need of
solitude. A terrific rush of heroic and romantic thoughts
surged over him, and gave him no rest.
</p>

<p>
He pictured to himself the solemn explanation he should
have with Zina, then the generous throbs of his all-forgiving
heart; his pallor and despair at the future ball in St.
Petersburg; then Spain, the Guadalquiver, and love, and
the old dying prince joining their hands with his last blessing.
Then came thoughts of his beautiful wife, devoted to
himself, and never ceasing to wonder at and admire her
husband's heroism and exalted refinement of taste and
conduct. Then, among other things, the attention which
he should attract among the ladies of the highest circles,
into which he would of course enter, thanks to his marriage
with Zina&mdash;widow of the Prince K.: then the inevitable
appointments, first as a vice-governor, with the delightful
accompaniment of salary: in a word, all, <emph>all</emph> that Maria Alexandrovna's
eloquence had pictured to his imagination, now
marched in triumphant procession through his brain, soothing
and attracting and flattering his self-love.
</p>

<p>
And yet&mdash;(I really cannot explain this phenomenon,
however!)&mdash;and yet, no sooner did the first flush of this delightful
sunrise of future delights pass off and fade away,
than the annoying thought struck him: this is all very
well, but it is in the future: and now, to-day, I shall look
a dreadful fool. As he reflected thus, he looked up and
found that he had wandered a long way, to some of the
dirty back slums of the town. A wet snow was falling; now
and again he met another belated pedestrian like himself.
The outer circumstances began to anger Mosgliakoff, which
was a bad sign; for when things are going well with us we
are always inclined to see everything in a rose-coloured
light.
</p>

<p>
Paul could not help remembering that up to now he had
been in the habit of cutting a dash at Mordasoff. He had
enjoyed being treated at all the houses he went to in the
town, as Zina's accepted lover, and to be congratulated, as
he often was, upon the honour of that distinction. He was
proud of being her future husband; and here he was now
with notice to quit. He would be laughed at. He couldn't
tell everybody about the future scene in the ball-room at
St. Petersburg, and the Guadalquiver, and all that! And
then a thought came out into prominence, which had been
uncomfortably fidgeting about in his brain for some time:
<q>Was it all true? <emph>Would</emph> it really come about as Maria
Alexandrovna had predicted?</q>
</p>

<p>
Here it struck him that Maria Alexandrovna was an
amazingly cunning woman; that, however worthy she might
be of universal esteem, still she was a known scandal-monger,
and lied from morning to night! that, again, she
probably had some good reason for wishing him out of the
place to-night. He next bethought him of Zina, and of her
parting look at him, which was very far from being expressive
of passionate love; he remembered also, that, less than
an hour ago she had called him a fool.
</p>

<p>
As he thought of the last fact Paul stopped in his tracks,
as though shot; blushed, and almost cried for very shame!
At this very moment he was unfortunate enough to lose
his footing on the slippery pavement, and to go head-first
into a snow-heap. As he stood shaking himself dry, a
whole troop of dogs, which had long trotted barking at his
heels, flew at him. One of them, a wretched little half-starved
beast, went so far as to fix her teeth into his fur
coat and hang therefrom. Swearing and striking out,
Paul cleared his way out of the yelping pack at last, in a
fury, and with rent clothes; and making his way as fast as he
could to the corner of the street, discovered that he hadn't
the slightest idea where he was. He walked up lanes, and
down streets, and round corners, and lost himself more and
more hopelessly; also his temper. <q>The devil take all
these confounded exalted ideas!</q> he growled, half aloud;
<q>and the archfiend take every one of you, you and your
Guadalquivers and humbug!</q>
</p>

<p>
Mosgliakoff was not in a pretty humour at this moment.
</p>

<p>
At last, tired and horribly angry, after two hours of
walking, he reached the door of Maria Alexandrovna's house.
</p>

<p>
Observing a host of carriages standing outside, he paused
to consider.
</p>

<p>
<q>Surely she has not a party to-night!</q> he thought, <q>and
if she has, <emph>why</emph> has she a party?</q>
</p>

<p>
He inquired of the servants, and found out that Maria
Alexandrovna had been out of town, and had fetched up
Afanassy Matveyevitch, gorgeous in his dress-suit and white
tie. He learned, further, that the prince was awake, but
had not as yet made his appearance in the <q>salon.</q>
</p>

<p>
On receiving this information, Paul Mosgliakoff said not
a word, but quietly made his way upstairs to his uncle's
room.
</p>

<p>
He was in that frame of mind in which a man determines
to commit some desperate act, out of revenge, aware at the
time, and wide awake to the fact that he is about to do the
deed, but forgetting entirely that he may very likely regret
it all his life afterwards!
</p>

<p>
Entering the prince's room, he found that worthy seated
before the glass, with a perfectly bare head, but with
whiskers and napoleon stuck on. His wig was in the
hands of his old and grey valet, his favourite Ivan
Pochomitch, and the latter was gravely and thoughtfully
combing it out.
</p>

<p>
As for the prince, he was indeed a pitiable object! He
was not half awake yet, for one thing; he sat as though he
were still dazed with sleep; he kept opening and shutting
his mouth, and stared at Mosgliakoff as though he did not
know him!
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, how are you, uncle?</q> asked Mosgliakoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>What, it's you, is it!</q> said the prince. <q>Ye&mdash;yes;
I've been as&mdash;leep a little while! Oh, heavens!</q> he cried
suddenly, with great animation, <q>why, I've got no wi&mdash;ig
on!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, never mind that, uncle; I'll help you on with it,
if you like!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Dear me; now you've found out my se&mdash;ecret! I
told him to shut the door. Now, my friend, you must give
me your word in&mdash;stantly, that you'll never breathe a hint
of this to anyone&mdash;I mean about my hair being ar&mdash;tificial!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, uncle! As if I could be guilty of such meanness?</q>
cried Paul, who was anxious to please the prince, for
reasons of his own.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, ye&mdash;yes. Well, as I see you are a good
fe&mdash;ellow, I&mdash;I'll just as&mdash;tonish you a little: I'll tell you all
my secrets! How do you like my mous&mdash;tache, my dear
boy?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Wonderful, uncle, wonderful! It astonishes me that
you should have been able to keep it so long!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Sp&mdash;are your wonder, my friend, it's ar&mdash;tificial!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No!! That's difficult to believe! Well, and your
whiskers, uncle! admit&mdash;you black them, now <emph>don't</emph> you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Black them? Not&mdash;only I don't black them, but they,
too, are ar&mdash;tificial!</q> said the Prince, regarding Mosgliakoff
with a look of triumph.
</p>

<p>
<q><emph>What!</emph> Artificial? No, no, uncle! I can't believe
<emph>that</emph>! You're laughing at me!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Parole d'honneur, mon ami!</foreign></q> cried the delighted old
man; <q>and fancy, all&mdash;everybody is taken in by them just
as you were! Even Stepanida Matveyevna cannot believe
they are not real, sometimes, although she often sticks them
on herself! But, I am sure, my dear friend, you will keep my
se&mdash;cret. Give me your word!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I do give you my word, uncle! But surely you do
not suppose I would be so mean as to divulge it?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, my boy! I had such a fall to-day, without you.
The coachman upset me out of the carriage again!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How? When?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, we were driving to the mo&mdash;nastery, when?&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I know, uncle: that was early this morning!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, no! A couple of hours ago, not more! I was
driving along with him, and he suddenly took and up&mdash;set
me!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, my dear uncle, you were asleep,</q> began Paul, in
amazement!
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, ye&mdash;yes. I did have a sleep; and then I
drove away, at least I&mdash;at least I&mdash;dear me, how strange it
all seems!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I assure you, uncle, you have been dreaming! You
saw all this in a dream! You have been sleeping quietly
here since just after dinner!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No!</q> And the prince reflected. <q>Ye&mdash;yes. Perhaps
I did see it all in a dream! However, I can remember all
I saw quite well. First, I saw a large bull with horns; and
then I saw a pro&mdash;curor, and I think he had huge horns
too. Then there was Napoleon Buonaparte. Did you
ever hear, my boy, that people say I am so like Napoleon
Buonaparte? But my profile is very like some old pope.
What do you think about it, my bo&mdash;oy?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I think you are much more like Napoleon Buonaparte,
uncle!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, ye&mdash;yes, of course&mdash;full face; so I am, my boy,
so I am! I dreamt of him on his is&mdash;land, and do you
know he was such a merry, talk&mdash;ative fellow, he quite
am&mdash;used me!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Who, uncle&mdash;Napoleon?</q> asked Mosgliakoff, looking
thoughtfully at the old man. A strange idea was beginning
to occupy his brain&mdash;an idea which he could not quite put
into shape as yet.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, ye&mdash;yes, Nap&mdash;oleon. We talked about philosophical
subjects. And do you know, my boy, I became
quite sorry that the English had been so hard upon
him. Of course, though, if one didn't chain him up, he
would be flying at people's throats again! Still I'm sorry
for him. Now I should have managed him quite differently.
I should have put him on an uninhabited island.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why uninhabited, uncle?</q> asked Mosgliakoff, absently.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, well, an inhabited one, then; but the in&mdash;habitants
must be good sort of people. And I should arrange all
sorts of amusements for him, at the State's charge: theatres,
balle's, and so on. And, of course, he should walk about,
under proper su&mdash;pervision. Then he should have tarts
(he liked tarts, you know), as many tarts as ever he pleased.
I should treat him like a fa&mdash;ather; and he would end by
being sorry for his sins, see if he wouldn't!</q>
</p>

<p>
Mosgliakoff listened absently to all this senile gabble, and
bit his nails with impatience. He was anxious to turn
the conversation on to the subject of marriage. He did not
know quite clearly why he wished to do so, but his heart
was boiling over with anger.
</p>

<p>
Suddenly the old man made an exclamation of surprise.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, my dear boy, I declare I've forgotten to tell you
about it. Fancy, I made an offer of marriage to-day!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>An offer of marriage, uncle?</q> cried Paul, brightening
up.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, ye&mdash;yes! an offer. Pachomief, are you going?
All right! Away with you! Ye&mdash;yes, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>c'est une charmante
personne</foreign>. But I confess, I took the step rather rash&mdash;ly.
I only begin to see that now. Dear me! dear, dear me!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Excuse me, uncle; but <emph>when</emph> did you make this offer?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, I admit I don't know exactly <emph>when</emph> I made it! Perhaps
I dre&mdash;dreamed it; I don't know. Dear me, how very
strange it all seems!</q>
</p>

<p>
Mosgliakoff trembled with joy: his new idea blazed forth
in full developed glory.
</p>

<p>
<q>And <emph>whom</emph> did you propose to?</q> he asked impatiently.
</p>

<p>
<q>The daughter of the house, my boy; that beau&mdash;tiful
girl. I&mdash;I forget what they call her. Bu&mdash;but, my dear
boy, you see I&mdash;I can't possibly marry. What am I to
do?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! of course, you are done for if you marry, that's
clear. But let me ask you one more question, uncle. Are
you perfectly certain that you actually made her an offer of
marriage?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, I'm sure of it; I&mdash;I&mdash;&mdash;.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And what if you dreamed the whole thing, just as
you did that you were upset out of the carriage a second
time?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Dear me! dear me! I&mdash;I really think I may have
dreamed it; it's very awkward. I don't know how to show
myself there, now. H&mdash;how could I find out, dear boy, for
certain? Couldn't I get to know by some outside way
whether I really did make her an offer of ma&mdash;arriage or
not? Why, just you think of my dreadful po&mdash;sition!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you know, uncle, I don't think we need trouble ourselves
to find out at all.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, wh&mdash;what then?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I am convinced that you were dreaming.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I&mdash;I think so myself, too, my dear fellow; es&mdash;pecially
as I often have that sort of dream.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You see, uncle, you had a drop of wine for lunch, and
then another drop or two for dinner, don't you know; and
so you may easily have&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, quite so, quite so; it may easily have been
that.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Besides, my dear uncle, however excited you may have
been, you would never have taken such a senseless step in
your waking moments. So far as I know you, uncle, you
are a man of the highest and most deliberate judgment, and
I am positive that&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, ye&mdash;yes.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, only imagine&mdash;if your relations were to get to hear
of such a thing. My goodness, uncle! they were cruel
enough to you before. What do you suppose they would
do <emph>now</emph>, eh?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Goodness gracious!</q> cried the frightened old prince.
<q>Good&mdash;ness gracious! Wh&mdash;why, what would they do,
do you think?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Do? Why, of course, they would all screech out that you
had acted under the influence of insanity: in fact, that you
were mad; that you had been swindled, and that you must
be put under proper restraint. In fact, they'd pop you
into some lunatic asylum.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mosgliakoff was well aware of the best method of frightening
the poor old man out of his wits.
</p>

<p>
<q>Gracious heavens!</q> cried the latter, trembling like
a leaflet with horror. <q>Gra&mdash;cious heavens! would they
really do that?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Undoubtedly; and, knowing this, uncle, think for yourself.
Could you possibly have done such a thing with your
eyes open? As if you don't understand what's good for you
just as well as your neighbours. I solemnly affirm that you
saw all this in a dream!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Of course, of course; un&mdash;doubtedly in a dream, un&mdash;doubtedly
so! What a clever fellow you are, my dear boy;
you saw it at once. I am deeply grate&mdash;ful to you for putting
me right. I was really quite under the im&mdash;pression
I had actually done it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And how glad I am that I met you, uncle,
before you went in there! Just fancy, what a mess
you might have made of it! You might have gone
in thinking you were engaged to the girl, and behaved
in the capacity of accepted lover. Think how fearfully
dangerous&mdash;&mdash;.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, of course; most dangerous!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, remember, this girl is twenty-three years old.
Nobody will marry her, and suddenly <emph>you</emph>, a rich and eminent
man of rank and title, appear on the scene as her
accepted swain. They would lay hold of the idea at once,
and act up to it, and swear that you really were her future
husband, and would marry you off, too. I daresay they
would even count upon your speedy death, and make their
calculations accordingly.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Then again, uncle; a man of your dignity&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, quite so, dig&mdash;nity!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And wisdom,&mdash;and amiability&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite so; wis&mdash;dom&mdash;wisdom!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And then&mdash;a prince into the bargain! Good gracious,
uncle, as if a man like yourself would make such a match as
<emph>that</emph>, if you really did mean marrying! What would your
relations say?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, my dear boy, they'd simply ea&mdash;eat me up,&mdash;I&mdash;I
know their cunning and malice of old! My dear fellow&mdash;you
won't believe it&mdash;but I assure you I was afraid they
were going to put me into a lun&mdash;atic asylum! a common
ma&mdash;ad-house! Goodness me, think of that! Whatever
should I have done with myself all day in a ma&mdash;ad-house?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Of course, of course! Well, I won't leave your side,
then, uncle, when you go downstairs. There are guests there
too!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Guests? dear me! I&mdash;I&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't be afraid, uncle; I shall be by you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I&mdash;I'm <emph>so</emph> much obliged to you, my dear boy; you have
simply sa&mdash;ved me, you have indeed! But, do you know
what,&mdash;I think I'd better go away altogether!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>To-morrow, uncle! to-morrow morning at seven! and
this evening you must be sure to say, in the presence of
everybody, that you are starting away at seven next morning:
you must say good-bye to-night!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Un&mdash;doubtedly, undoubtedly&mdash;I shall go;&mdash;but what
if they talk to me as though I were engaged to the young
wo&mdash;oman?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't you fear, uncle! I shall be there! And mind,
whatever they say or hint to you, you must declare
that you dreamed the whole thing&mdash;as indeed you did, of
course?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, quite so, un&mdash;doubtedly so! But, do you know
my dear boy, it was a most be&mdash;witching dream, for all that!
She is a wond&mdash;erfully lovely girl, my boy,&mdash;such a figure&mdash;bewitching&mdash;be&mdash;witching!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>au revoir</foreign>, uncle! I'm going down, now, and
you&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How! How! you are not going to leave me alone?</q>
cried the old man, greatly alarmed.
</p>

<p>
<q>No, no&mdash;oh no, uncle; but we must enter the room
separately. First, I will go in, and then you come down;
that will be better!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well, very well. Besides, I just want to note down
one little i&mdash;dea&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Capital, uncle! jot it down, and then come at once;
don't wait any longer; and to-morrow morning&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And to-morrow morning away we go to the Her&mdash;mitage,
straight to the Her&mdash;mitage! Charming&mdash;charm&mdash;ing! but, do
you know, my boy,&mdash;she's a fas&mdash;cinating girl&mdash;she is
indeed! be&mdash;witching! Such a bust! and, really, if I were to
marry, I&mdash;I&mdash;really&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, no, uncle! Heaven forbid!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes&mdash;yes&mdash;quite so&mdash;Heaven for&mdash;bid!&mdash;well, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>au revoir</foreign>,
my friend&mdash;I'll come directly; by the bye&mdash;I meant to ask
you, have you read Kazanoff's Memoirs?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, uncle. Why?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, yes, quite so&mdash;I forget what I wanted to say&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You'll remember afterwards, uncle! <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>au revoir!</foreign></q>
</p>

<p>
<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Au revoir</foreign>, my boy, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>au revoir</foreign>&mdash;but, I say, it was a bewitching
dream, a most be&mdash;witching dream!</q>
</p>


</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XII.</head>

<p>
<q>Here we all are, all of us, come to spend the evening;
Proskovia Ilinishna is coming too, and Luisa Karlovna and
all!</q> cried Mrs. Antipova as she entered the salon, and
looked hungrily round. She was a neat, pretty little woman!
she was well-dressed, and knew it.
</p>

<p>
She looked greedily around, as I say, because she had an
idea that the prince and Zina were hidden together somewhere
about the room.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, and Katerina Petrovna, and Felisata Michaelovna
are coming as well,</q> added Natalia Dimitrievna, a huge
woman&mdash;whose figure had pleased the prince so much, and
who looked more like a grenadier than anything else. This
monster had been hand and glove with little Mrs. Antipova for
the last three weeks; they were now quite inseparable.
Natalia looked as though she could pick her little friend up
and swallow her, bones and all, without thinking.
</p>

<p>
<q>I need not say with what <emph>rapture</emph> I welcome you both
to my house, and for a whole evening, too!</q> piped Maria
Alexandrovna, a little recovered from her first shock of
amazement; <q>but do tell me, what miracle is it that has
brought you all to-day, when I had quite despaired of ever
seeing anyone of you in my house again?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, oh! my <emph>dear</emph> Maria Alexandrovna!</q> said Natalia,
very affectedly, but sweetly. The attributes of sweetness
and affectation were a curious contrast to her personal
appearance.
</p>

<p>
<q>You see, dearest Maria Alexandrovna,</q> chirped Mrs.
Antipova, <q>we really must get on with the private
theatricals question! It was only this very day that Peter
Michaelovitch was saying how <emph>bad</emph> it was of us to have
made no progress towards rehearsing, and so on; and that
it was quite time we brought all our silly squabbles to an
end! Well, four of us got together to-day, and then it
struck us <q>Let's all go to Maria Alexandrovna's, and settle
the matter once for all!</q> So Natalia Dimitrievna let all
the rest know that we were to meet here! We'll soon settle
it&mdash;I don't think we should allow it to be said that we do
nothing but <q>squabble</q> over the preliminaries and get no
farther, do <emph>you</emph>, dear Maria Alexandrovna?</q> She added,
playfully, and kissing our heroine affectionately, <q>Goodness
me, Zenaida, I declare you grow prettier every day!</q>
And she betook herself to embracing Zina with equal affection.
</p>

<p>
<q>She has nothing else to do, but sit and grow more and
more beautiful!</q> said Natalia with great sweetness, rubbing
her huge hands together.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, the devil take them all! they know I care nothing
about private theatricals&mdash;cursed magpies!</q> reflected
Maria Alexandrovna, beside herself with rage.
</p>

<p>
<q>Especially, dear, as that delightful prince is with you
just now. You know there is a private theatre in his house at
Donchanof, and we have discovered that somewhere or
other there, there are a lot of old theatrical properties and
decorations and scenery. The prince was at my house
to-day, but I was so surprised to see him that it all went
clean out of my head and I forgot to ask him. Now we'll
broach the subject before him. You must support me
and we'll persuade him to send us all the old rubbish that
can be found. We want to get the prince to come and
see the play, too! He is sure to subscribe, isn't he&mdash;as
it is for the poor? Perhaps he would even take a part; he
is such a dear, kind, willing old man. If only he did, it
would make the fortune of our play!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Of course he will take a part! why, he can be made to
play <emph>any</emph> part!</q> remarked Natalia significantly.
</p>

<p>
Mrs. Antipova had not exaggerated. Guests poured in
every moment! Maria Alexandrovna hardly had time to
receive one lot and make the usual exclamations of surprise
and delight exacted by the laws of etiquette before another
arrival would be announced.
</p>

<p>
I will not undertake to describe all these good people.
I will only remark that every one of them, on arrival, looked
about her cunningly; and that every face wore an expression
of expectation and impatience.
</p>

<p>
Some of them came with the distinct intention of witnessing
some scene of a delightfully scandalous nature, and were
prepared to be very angry indeed if it should turn out that
they were obliged to leave the house without the gratification
of their hopes.
</p>

<p>
All behaved in the most amiable and affectionate manner
towards their hostess; but Maria Alexandrovna firmly
braced her nerves for battle.
</p>

<p>
Many apparently natural and innocent questions were
asked about the prince; but in each one might be detected
some hint or insinuation.
</p>

<p>
Tea came in, and people moved about and changed
places: one group surrounded the piano; Zina was requested
to play and sing, but answered drily that she was not quite
well&mdash;and the paleness of her face bore out this assertion.
Inquiries were made for Mosgliakoff; and these inquiries
were addressed to Zina.
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna proved that she had the eyes and
ears of ten ordinary mortals. She saw and heard all that
was going on in every corner of the room; she heard and
answered every question asked, and answered readily and
cleverly. She was dreadfully anxious about Zina, however,
and wondered why she did not leave the room, as she
usually did on such occasions.
</p>

<p>
Poor Afanassy came in for his share of notice, too. It
was the custom of these amiable people of Mordasoff to
do their best to set Maria Alexandrovna and her husband
<q>by the ears;</q> but to-day there were hopes of extracting
valuable news and secrets out of the candid simplicity of
the latter.
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna watched the state of siege into
which the wretched Afanassy was thrown, with great
anxiety; he was answering <q>H'm!</q> to all questions put to
him, as instructed; but with so wretched an expression
and so extremely artificial a mien that Maria Alexandrovna
could barely restrain her wrath.
</p>

<p>
<q>Maria Alexandrovna! your husband won't have a word
to say to me!</q> remarked a sharp-faced little lady with a
devil-may-care manner, as though she cared nothing for anybody,
and was not to be abashed under any circumstances.
<q>Do ask him to be a <emph>little</emph> more courteous towards ladies!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I really don't know myself what can have happened to
him to-day!</q> said Maria Alexandrovna, interrupting her
conversation with Mrs. Antipova and Natalia, and laughing
merrily; <q>he is so <emph>dreadfully</emph> uncommunicative! He has
scarcely said a word even to <emph>me</emph>, all day! Why don't you
answer Felisata Michaelovna, Afanassy? What did you
ask him?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But, but&mdash;why, mammy, you told me yourself</q>&mdash;began
the bewildered and lost Afanassy. At this moment he was
standing at the fireside with one hand placed inside his
waistcoat, in an artistic position which he had chosen
deliberately, on mature reflection,&mdash;and he was sipping his
tea. The questions of the ladies had so confused him that
he was blushing like a girl.
</p>

<p>
When he began the justification of himself recorded
above, he suddenly met so dreadful a look in the eyes of
his infuriated spouse that he nearly lost all consciousness,
for terror!
</p>

<p>
Uncertain what to do, but anxious to recover himself and
win back her favour once more, he said nothing, but took a
gulp of tea to restore his scattered senses.
</p>

<p>
Unfortunately the tea was too hot; which fact, together
with the hugeness of the gulp he took&mdash;quite upset him.
He burned his throat, choked, sent the cup flying, and burst
into such a fit of coughing that he was obliged to leave the
room for a time, awakening universal astonishment by his
conduct.
</p>

<p>
In a word, Maria Alexandrovna saw clearly enough that
her guests knew all about it, and had assembled with malicious
intent! The situation was dangerous! They were
quite capable of confusing and overwhelming the feeble-minded
old prince before her very eyes! They might even
carry him off bodily&mdash;after stirring up a quarrel between
the old man and herself! <emph>Anything</emph> might happen.
</p>

<p>
But fate had prepared her one more surprise. The door
opened and in came Mosgliakoff&mdash;who, as she thought,
was far enough away at his godfather's, and would not come
near her to-night! She shuddered as though something
had hurt her.
</p>

<p>
Mosgliakoff stood a moment at the door, looking around
at the company. He was a little bewildered, and could not
conceal his agitation, which showed itself very clearly in his
expression.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, it's Paul Alexandrovitch! and you told us he had
gone to his godfather's, Maria Alexandrovna. We were
told you had hidden yourself away from us, Paul Alexandrovitch!</q>
cried Natalia.
</p>

<p>
<q>Hidden myself?</q> said Paul, with a crooked sort of a
smile. <q>What a strange expression! Excuse me, Natalia
Dimitrievna, but I never hide from anyone; I have no
cause to do so, that I know of! Nor do I ever hide anyone
else!</q> he added, looking significantly at Maria Alexandrovna.
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna trembled in her shoes.
</p>

<p>
<q>Surely this fool of a man is not up to anything disagreeable!</q>
she thought. <q>No, no! that would be worse
than anything!</q> She looked curiously and anxiously into
his eyes.
</p>

<p>
<q>Is it true, Paul Alexandrovitch, that you have just been
politely dismissed?&mdash;the Government service, I mean, of
course!</q> remarked the daring Felisata Michaelovna, looking
impertinently into his eyes.
</p>

<p>
<q>Dismissed! How dismissed? I'm simply changing my
department, that's all! I am to be placed at Petersburg!</q>
Mosgliakoff answered, drily.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! well, I congratulate you!</q> continued the bold
young woman. <q>We were alarmed to hear that you were
trying for a&mdash;a place down here at Mordasoff. The berths
here are wretched, Paul Alexandrovitch&mdash;no good at all, I
assure you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I don't know&mdash;there's a place as teacher at the school,
vacant, I believe,</q> remarked Natalia.
</p>

<p>
This was such a crude and palpable insinuation that even
Mrs. Antipova was ashamed of her friend, and kicked her,
under the table.
</p>

<p>
<q>You don't suppose Paul Alexandrovitch would accept
the place vacated by a wretched little schoolmaster!</q> said
Felisata Michaelovna.
</p>

<p>
But Paul did not answer. He turned at this moment, and
encountered Afanassy Matveyevitch, just returning into the
room. The latter offered him his hand. Mosgliakoff, like
a fool, looked beyond poor Afanassy, and did not take his
outstretched hand: annoyed to the limits of endurance, he
stepped up to Zina, and muttered, gazing angrily into her
eyes:
</p>

<p>
<q>This is all thanks to you! Wait a bit; you shall see
this very day whether I am a fool or not!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why put off the revelation? It is clear enough
already!</q> said Zina, aloud, staring contemptuously at her
former lover.
</p>

<p>
Mosgliakoff hurriedly left her. He did not half like
the loud tone she spoke in.
</p>

<p>
<q>Have you been to your godfather's?</q> asked Maria
Alexandrovna at last, determined to sound matters in this
direction.
</p>

<p>
<q>No, I've just been with uncle.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>With your uncle! What! have you just come from
the prince now?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh&mdash;oh! and we were told the prince was asleep!</q>
added Natalia Dimitrievna, looking daggers at Maria
Alexandrovna.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do not be disturbed about the prince, Natalia Dimitrievna,</q>
replied Paul, <q>he is awake now, and quite restored
to his senses. He was persuaded to drink a good deal too
much wine, first at your house, and then here; so that he
quite lost his head, which never was too strong. However,
I have had a talk with him, and he now seems to have
entirely recovered his judgment, thank God! He is coming
down directly to take his leave, Maria Alexandrovna, and to
thank you for all your kind hospitality; and to-morrow
morning early we are off to the Hermitage. Thence I shall
myself see him safe home to Donchanovo, in order that he
may be far from the temptation to further excesses like that
of to-day. There I shall give him over into the hands of
Stepanida Matveyevna, who must be back at home by
this time, and who will assuredly never allow him another
opportunity of going on his travels, I'll answer for that!</q>
</p>

<p>
So saying, Mosgliakoff stared angrily at Maria Alexandrovna.
The latter sat still, apparently dumb with
amazement. I regret to say&mdash;it gives me great pain to
record it&mdash;that, perhaps for the first time in her life, my
heroine was decidedly alarmed.
</p>

<p>
<q>So the prince is off to-morrow morning! Dear me;
why is that?</q> inquired Natalia Dimitrievna, very sweetly,
of Maria Alexandrovna.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes. How is that?</q> asked Mrs. Antipova, in
astonishment.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes; dear me! how comes that, I wonder!</q> said two or
three voices. <q>How can that be? When we were told&mdash;dear
me! How very strange!</q>
</p>

<p>
But the mistress of the house could not find words to
reply in.
</p>

<p>
However, at this moment the general attention was distracted
by a most unwonted and eccentric episode. In the
next room was heard a strange noise&mdash;sharp exclamations
and hurrying feet, which was followed by the sudden appearance
of Sophia Petrovna, the fidgety guest who had
called upon Maria Alexandrovna in the morning.
</p>

<p>
Sophia Petrovna was a very eccentric woman indeed&mdash;so
much so that even the good people of Mordasoff could not
support her, and had lately voted her out of society. I
must observe that every evening, punctually at seven, this
lady was in the habit of having, what she called, <q>a snack,</q>
and that after this snack, which she declared was for the
benefit of her liver, her condition was well <emph>emancipated</emph>, to
use no stronger term. She was in this very condition, as
described, now, as she appeared flinging herself into Maria
Alexandrovna's salon.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oho! so this is how you treat me, Maria Alexandrovna!</q>
she shouted at the top of her voice. <q>Oh! don't be afraid,
I shall not inflict myself upon you for more than a minute!
I won't sit down. I just came in to see if what they said
was true! Ah! so you go in for balls and receptions and
parties, and Sophia Petrovna is to sit at home alone, and
knit stockings, is she? You ask the whole town in, and
leave me out, do you? Yes, and I was <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mon ange</foreign>, and <q>dear,</q>
and all the rest of it when I came in to warn you of Natalia
Dimitrievna having got hold of the prince! And now this
very Natalia Dimitrievna, whom you swore at like a pickpocket,
and who was just about as polite when she spoke of
you, is here among your guests? Oh, don't mind <emph>me</emph>, Natalia
Dimitrievna, <emph>I</emph> don't want your <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>chocolat &agrave; la sant&eacute;</foreign> at a
penny the ounce, six cups to the ounce! thanks, I can
do better at home; t'fu, a good deal better.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Evidently!</q> observed Natalia Dimitrievna.
</p>

<p>
<q>But&mdash;goodness gracious, Sophia Petrovna!</q> cried the
hostess, flushing with annoyance; <q>what is it all about?
Do show a little common sense!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, don't bother about me, Maria Alexandrovna, thank you!
I know all about it&mdash;oh, dear me, yes!&mdash;<emph>I</emph> know all about
it!</q> cried Sophia Petrovna, in her shrill squeaky voice,
from among the crowd of guests who now surrounded her,
and who seemed to derive immense satisfaction from this
unexpected scene. <q>Oh, yes, I know all about it, I assure
you! Your friend Nastasia came over and told me all! You
got hold of the old prince, made him drunk and persuaded
him to make an offer of marriage to your daughter Zina&mdash;whom
nobody else will marry; and I daresay you suppose
you are going to be a very great lady, indeed&mdash;a sort of
duchess in lace and jewellery. Tfu! Don't flatter yourself;
you may not be aware that I, too, am a colonel's
lady! and if you don't care to ask me to your betrothal
parties, you needn't: I scorn and despise you and your
parties too! I've seen honester women than you, you
know! I have dined at Countess Zalichvatsky's; a chief
commissioner proposed for my hand! A lot <emph>I</emph> care for
your invitations. Tfu!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Look here, Sophia Petrovna,</q> said Maria Alexandrovna,
beside herself with rage; <q>I assure you that people do not
indulge in this sort of sally at respectable houses; especially
in <emph>the condition you are now in</emph>! And let me tell you that if
you do not immediately relieve me of your presence and
eloquence, I shall be obliged to take the matter into my
own hands!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, I know&mdash;you'll get your people to turn me out!
Don't trouble yourself&mdash;I know the way out! Good-bye,&mdash;marry
your daughter to whom you please, for all I care.
And as for <emph>you</emph>, Natalia Dimitrievna, I will thank you not to
laugh at me! I may not have been asked here, but at all
events <emph>I</emph> did not dance a can-can for the prince's benefit.
What may <emph>you</emph> be laughing at, Mrs. Antipova? I suppose
you haven't heard that your <emph>great friend</emph> Lushiloff has
broken his leg?&mdash;he has just been taken home. Tfu!
Good-bye, Maria Alexandrovna&mdash;good luck to you! Tfu!</q>
</p>

<p>
Sophia Petrovna now disappeared. All the guests
laughed; Maria Alexandrovna was in a state of indescribable
fury.
</p>

<p>
<q>I think the good lady must have been drinking!</q> said
Natalia Dimitrievna, sweetly.
</p>

<p>
<q>But what audacity!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Quelle abominable femme!</foreign></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What a raving lunatic!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But really, what excessively improper things she says!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, but what <emph>could</emph> she have meant by a 'betrothal
party?' What sort of a betrothal party is this?</q> asked
Felisata Michaelovna innocently.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is too bad&mdash;too bad!</q> Maria Alexandrovna burst
out at last. <q>It is just such abominable women as this that
sow nonsensical rumours about! it is not the fact that there
<emph>are</emph> such women about, Felisata Michaelovna, that is so
surprising; the astonishing part of the matter is that ladies
can be found who support and encourage them, and believe
their abominable tales, and&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The prince, the prince!</q> cried all the guests at once.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, oh, here he is&mdash;the dear, dear prince!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, thank goodness, we shall hear all the particulars
now!</q> murmured Felisata Michaelovna to her neighbour.
</p>


</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XIII.</head>

<p>
The prince entered and smiled benignly around.
</p>

<p>
All the agitation which his conversation with Mosgliakoff,
a quarter of an hour since, had aroused in his chicken-heart
vanished at the sight of the ladies.
</p>

<p>
Those gentle creatures received him with chirps and
exclamations of joy. Ladies always petted our old friend
the prince, and were&mdash;as a rule&mdash;wonderfully familiar with
him. He had a way of amusing them with his own
individuality which was astonishing! Only this morning
Felisata Michaelovna had announced that she would sit on
his knee with the greatest pleasure, if he liked; <q>because
he was such a dear old pet of an old man!</q>
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna fastened her eyes on him, to read&mdash;if
she could&mdash;if it were but the slightest indication of his
state of mind, and to get a possible idea for a way out of
this horribly critical position. But there was nothing to be
made of <emph>his</emph> face; it was just as before&mdash;just as ever it was!
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah&mdash;h! here's the prince at last!</q> cried several voices.
<q>Oh, Prince, how we have waited and waited for you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>With impatience, Prince, with impatience!</q> another
chorus took up the strain.
</p>

<p>
<q>Dear me, how very flat&mdash;tering!</q> said the old man,
settling himself near the tea-table.
</p>

<p>
The ladies immediately surrounded him. There only
remained Natalia Dimitrievna and Mrs. Antipova with the
hostess. Afanassy stood and smiled with great courtesy.
</p>

<p>
Mosgliakoff also smiled as he gazed defiantly at Zina,
who, without taking the slightest notice of him, took a chair
near her father, and sat down at the fireside.
</p>

<p>
<q>Prince, do tell us&mdash;is it true that you are about to leave
us so soon?</q> asked Felisata Michaelovna.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, yes, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mesdames</foreign>; I am going abroad almost im&mdash;mediately!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Abroad, Prince, abroad? Why, what can have caused
you to take such a step as that?</q> cried several ladies at once.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes&mdash;yes, abroad,</q> said the prince; <q>and do you know
it is principally for the sake of the new i&mdash;deas&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How, new ideas? what new ideas&mdash;what does he
mean?</q> the astonished ladies asked of one another.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes. Quite so&mdash;new ideas!</q> repeated the prince
with an air of deep conviction, <q>everybody goes abroad
now for new ideas, and I'm going too, to see if I can pick
any up.</q>
</p>

<p>
Up to this moment Maria Alexandrovna had listened to
the conversation observantly; but it now struck her that the
prince had entirely forgotten her existence&mdash;which would
not do!
</p>

<p>
<q>Allow me, Prince, to introduce my husband, Afanassy
Matveyevitch. He hastened up from our country seat so
soon as ever he heard of your arrival in our house.</q>
</p>

<p>
Afanassy, under the impression that he was being praised,
smiled amiably and beamed all over.
</p>

<p>
<q>Very happy, very happy&mdash;Afanassy Mat&mdash;veyevitch!</q>
said the prince. <q>Wait a moment: your name reminds me
of something, Afanassy Mat&mdash;veyevitch; ye&mdash;yes, you are the
man down at the village! Charming, charm&mdash;ing! Very
glad, I'm sure. Do you remember, my boy,</q> (to Paul) <q>the
nice little rhyme we fitted out to him? What was it?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, I know, prince,</q> said Felisata Michaelovna&mdash;
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><q rend='pre'>When the husband's away</q></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>The wife will play!</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<q>Wasn't that it? We had it last year at the theatre.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, yes, quite so, ye&mdash;yes, <q>the wife will play!</q> That's
it: charming, charming. So you are that ve&mdash;ry man? Dear
me, I'm <emph>very</emph> glad, I'm sure,</q> said the prince, stretching out
his hand, but not rising from his chair. <q>Dear me, and how
is your health, my dear sir?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>H'm!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, he's quite well, thank you, prince, <emph>quite</emph> well,</q>
answered Maria Alexandrovna quickly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, I see he is&mdash;he looks it! And are you still at
the vill&mdash;age? Dear me, very pleased, I'm sure; why,
how red he looks, and he's always laugh&mdash;ing.</q>
</p>

<p>
Afanassy smiled and bowed, and even <q>scraped,</q> as the
prince spoke, but at the last observation he suddenly, and
without warning or apparent reason, burst into loud fits of
laughter.
</p>

<p>
The ladies were delighted. Zina flushed up, and with
flashing eyes darted a look at her mother, who, in her turn,
was boiling over with rage.
</p>

<p>
It was time to change the conversation.
</p>

<p>
<q>Did you have a nice nap, prince?</q> she inquired in
honied accents; but at the same time giving Afanassy to
understand, with very un-honied looks that he might go&mdash;well,
anywhere!
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, I slept won&mdash;derfully, wonderfully? And do you
know, I had such a most fascinating, be&mdash;witching dream!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>A dream? how delightful! I do so love to hear people
tell their dreams,</q> cried Felisata.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, a fas&mdash;cinating dream,</q> stammered the old man
again, <q>quite be&mdash;witching, but all the more a dead secret
for that very reas&mdash;on.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, Prince, you don't mean to say you can't tell us?</q>
said Mrs. Antipova. <q>I suppose it's an <emph>extraordinary</emph> dream,
isn't it?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>A dead secret!</q> repeated the prince, purposely whetting
the curiosity of the ladies, and enjoying the fun.
</p>

<p>
<q>Then it <emph>must</emph> be interesting, oh, <emph>dreadfully</emph> interesting,</q>
cried other ladies.
</p>

<p>
<q>I don't mind taking a bet that the prince dreamed that
he was kneeling at some lovely woman's feet and making a
declaration of love,</q> said Felisata Michaelovna. <q>Confess,
now, prince, that it was so? confess, dear prince, confess.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, Prince, confess!</q> the chorus took up the cry.
The old man listened solemnly until the last voice was
hushed. The ladies' guesswork flattered his vanity wonderfully;
he was as pleased as he could be. <q>Though I did
say that my dream was a dead se&mdash;cret,</q> he replied at last,
<q>still I am obliged to confess, dear lady, that to my
great as&mdash;tonishment you have almost exactly guessed
it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I've guessed it, I've guessed it,</q> cried Felisata, in a
rapture of joy. <q>Well, prince, say what you like, but it's
your <emph>plain</emph> duty to tell us the name of your beauty; come
now, <emph>isn't</emph> it?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Of course, of course, prince.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Is she in this town?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Dear prince, <emph>do</emph> tell us.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><emph>Darling</emph> prince, do, <emph>do</emph> tell us; you positively <emph>must</emph>,</q>
was heard on all sides.
</p>

<p>
<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Mesdames, mes&mdash;dames</foreign>; if you must know, I will go so
far as to say that it is the most charming, and be&mdash;witching,
and vir&mdash;tuous lady I know,</q> said the prince, unctuously.
</p>

<p>
<q>The most bewitching? and belonging to this place?
Who <emph>can</emph> it be?</q> cried the ladies, interchanging looks and
signs.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, of course, the young lady who is considered the
reigning beauty here,</q> remarked Natalia Dimitrievna, rubbing
her hands and looking hard at Zina with those cat's-eyes
of hers. All joined her in staring at Zina.
</p>

<p>
<q>But, prince, if you dream those sort of things, why
should not you marry somebody <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>bona fide</foreign>?</q> asked Felisata,
looking around her with a significant expression.
</p>

<p>
<q>We would marry you off beautifully, prince!</q> said
somebody else.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, dear prince, <emph>do</emph> marry!</q> chirped another.
</p>

<p>
<q>Marry, marry, <emph>do</emph> marry!</q> was now the cry on all sides.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes. Why should I not ma&mdash;arry!</q> said the old
man, confused and bewildered with all the cries and exclamations
around him.
</p>

<p>
<q>Uncle!</q> cried Mosgliakoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, my boy, quite so; I un&mdash;derstand what you
mean. I may as well tell you, ladies, that I am not in a
position to marry again; and having passed one most
delightful evening with our fascinating hostess, I must start
away to-morrow to the Hermitage, and then I shall go
straight off abroad, and study the question of the enlightenment
of Europe.</q>
</p>

<p>
Zina shuddered, and looked over at her mother with an
expression of unspeakable anguish.
</p>

<p>
But Maria Alexandrovna had now made up her mind
how to act; all this while she had played a mere waiting
game, observing closely and carefully all that was said or
done, although she could see only too clearly that her
plans were undermined, and that her foes had come about
her in numbers which were too great to be altogether
pleasant.
</p>

<p>
At last, however, she comprehended the situation, she
thought, completely. She had gauged how the matter
stood in all its branches, and she determined to slay the
hundred-headed hydra at one fell blow!
</p>

<p>
With great majesty, then, she rose from her seat, and
approached the tea-table, stalking across the room with
firm and dignified tread, as she looked around upon her pigmy
foes. The fire of inspiration blazed in her eyes. She
resolved to smite once, and annihilate this vile nest of
poisonous scandal-adders: to destroy the miserable Mosgliakoff,
as though he were a blackbeetle, and with one triumphant
blow to reassert all her influence over this miserable
old idiot-prince!
</p>

<p>
Some audacity was requisite for such a performance, of
course; but Maria Alexandrovna had not even to put her
hand in her pocket for a supply of that particular commodity.
</p>

<p>
<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Mesdames</foreign>,</q> she began, solemnly, and with much dignity
(Maria Alexandrovna was always a great admirer of solemnity);
<q rend='pre'><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mesdames</foreign>, I have been a listener to your conversation&mdash;to
your witty remarks and merry jokes&mdash;long enough, and
I consider that my turn has come, at last, to put in a word
in contribution.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You are aware we have all met here accidentally (to my
great joy, I must add&mdash;to my very great joy); but, though
I should be the first to refuse to divulge a family secret
before the strictest rules of ordinary propriety rendered
such a revelation necessary, yet, as my dear guest here
appears to me to have given us to understand, by covert
hints and insinuations, that he is not averse to the matter
becoming common property (he will forgive me if I have
mistaken his intentions!)&mdash;I cannot help feeling that the
prince is not only not averse, but actually desires me to make
known our great family secret. Am I right, Prince?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, quite so, quite so! Very glad, ve&mdash;ry glad,
I'm sure!</q> said the prince, who had not the remotest idea
what the good lady was talking about!
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna, for greater effect, now paused to take
breath, and looked solemnly and proudly around upon the
assembled guests, all of whom were now listening with
greedy but slightly disturbed curiosity to what their hostess
was about to reveal to them.
</p>

<p>
Mosgliakoff shuddered; Zina flushed up, and arose from
her seat; Afanassy, seeing that something important was
about to happen, blew his nose violently, in order to be
ready for any emergency.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, ladies; I am ready&mdash;nay, gratified&mdash;to entrust my
family secret to your keeping!&mdash;&mdash;This evening, the
prince, overcome by the beauty and virtues of my daughter,
has done her the honour of proposing to me for her hand.
Prince,</q> she concluded, in trembling tearful accents,
<q>dear Prince; you must not, you cannot blame me for my
candour! It is only my overwhelming joy that could have
torn this dear secret prematurely from my heart: and what
mother is there who will blame me in such a case as this?</q>
</p>

<p>
Words fail me to describe the effect produced by this
most unexpected sally on the part of Maria Alexandrovna.
All present appeared to be struck dumb with amazement.
These perfidious guests, who had thought to frighten Maria
Alexandrovna by showing her that they knew her secret;
who thought to annihilate her by the premature revelation
of that secret; who thought to overwhelm her, for the
present, with their hints and insinuations; these guests
were themselves struck down and pulverized by this fearless
candour on her part! Such audacious frankness
argued the consciousness of strength.
</p>

<p>
<q>So that the prince actually, and of his own free-will
is really going to marry Zina? So they did not drink
and bully and swindle him into it? So he is not to
be married burglariously and forcibly? So Maria Alexandrovna
is not afraid of anybody? Then we can't knock
this marriage on the head&mdash;since the prince is not being
married compulsorily!</q>
</p>

<p>
Such were the questions and exclamations the visitors
now put to themselves and each other.
</p>

<p>
But very soon the whispers which the hostess's words had
awakened all over the room, suddenly changed to chirps
and exclamations of joy.
</p>

<p>
Natalia Dimitrievna was the first to come forward and
embrace Maria Alexandrovna; then came Mrs. Antipova;
next Felisata Michaelovna. All present were shortly on
their feet and moving about, changing places. Many of
the ladies were pale with rage. Some began to congratulate
Zina, who was confused enough without; some attached
themselves to the wretched Afanassy Matveyevitch. Maria
Alexandrovna stretched her arms theatrically, and embraced
her daughter&mdash;almost by force.
</p>

<p>
The prince alone gazed upon the company with a sort
of confused wonder; but he smiled on as before. He
seemed to be pleased with the scene. At sight of the
mother and daughter embracing, he took out his handkerchief,
and wiped his eye, in the corner of which there
really was a tear.
</p>

<p>
Of course the company fell upon him with their congratulations
before very long.
</p>

<p>
<q>I congratulate you, Prince! I congratulate you!</q>
came from all sides at once.
</p>

<p>
<q>So you <emph>are</emph> going to be married, Prince?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>So you <emph>really are</emph> going to marry?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Dear Prince! You really are to be married, then?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, ye&mdash;yes; quite so, quite so!</q> replied the old
fellow, delighted beyond measure with all the rapture and
atmosphere of congratulation around him; <q>and I confess
what I like best of all, is the ve&mdash;ery kind in&mdash;terest you all
take in me! I shall never forget it, never for&mdash;get it!
Charming! charming! You have brought the tears to my
eyes!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Kiss me, prince!</q> cried Felisata Michaelovna, in
stentorian tones.
</p>

<p>
<q>And I con&mdash;fess further,</q> continued the Prince, as well
as the constant physical interruptions from all sides allowed
him; <q>I confess I am beyond measure as&mdash;tonished that
Maria Alexandrovna, our revered hostess, should have had
the extraordinary penet&mdash;ration to guess my dream! She
might have dreamed it herself, instead of me. Ex&mdash;traordinary
perspicacity! Won&mdash;derful, wonderful!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, prince; your dream again!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, come, prince! admit&mdash;confess!</q> cried one and all.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, prince, it is no use concealing it now; it is time
we divulged this secret of ours!</q> said Maria Alexandrovna,
severely and decidedly. <q>I quite entered into your refined,
allegorical manner; the delightful delicacy with which you
gave me to understand, by means of subtle insinuations, that
you wished the fact of your engagement to be made
known. Yes, ladies, it is all true! This very evening the
prince knelt at my daughter's feet, and actually, and by no
means in a dream, made a solemn proposal of marriage to
her!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes&mdash;yes, quite so! just exactly like that; and under the
very cir&mdash;cumstances she describes: just like re&mdash;ality,</q>
said the old man. <q>My dear young lady,</q> he continued,
bowing with his greatest courtesy to Zina, who had
by no means recovered from her amazement as yet;
<q>my dear young lady, I swear to you, I should never
have dared thus to bring your name into pro&mdash;minence,
if others had not done so before me! It was a most
be&mdash;witching dream! a be&mdash;witching dream! and I am
doubly happy that I have been per&mdash;mitted to describe it.
Charming&mdash;charming!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Dear me! how very curious it is: he insists on sticking
to his idea about a dream!</q> whispered Mrs. Antipova to the
now slightly paling Maria Alexandrovna. Alas! that great
woman had felt her heart beating more quickly than she
liked without this last little reminder!
</p>

<p>
<q>What does it mean?</q> whispered the ladies among
themselves.
</p>

<p>
<q>Excuse me, prince,</q> began Maria Alexandrovna, with a
miserable attempt at a smile, <q>but I confess you astonish
me a great deal! What is this strange idea of yours about a
dream? I confess I had thought you were joking up to
this moment; but&mdash;if it be a joke on your part, it is exceedingly
out of place! I should like&mdash;I am <emph>anxious</emph> to
ascribe your conduct to absence of mind, but&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes; it may really be a case of absence of mind!</q> put
in Natalia Dimitrievna in a whisper.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes&mdash;yes&mdash;of course, quite so; it may easily be absence
of mind!</q> confirmed the prince, who clearly did not in
the least comprehend what they were trying to get out of
him; <q>and with regard to this subject, let me tell you a little
an&mdash;ecdote. I was asked to a funeral at Petersburg, and
I went and made a little mis&mdash;take about it and thought it
was a birthday par&mdash;ty! So I brought a lovely bouquet of
cam&mdash;ellias! When I came in and saw the master of the
house lying in state on a table, I didn't know where to
lo&mdash;ok, or what to do with my ca&mdash;mellias, I assure you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes; but, Prince, this is not the moment for stories!</q>
observed Maria Alexandrovna, with great annoyance. <q>Of
course, my daughter has no need to beat up a husband;
but at the same time, I must repeat that you yourself here,
just by the piano, made her an offer of marriage. <emph>I</emph> did
not ask you to do it! I may say I was amazed to hear it!
However, since the episode of your proposal, I may say that
I have thought of nothing else; and I have only waited for
your appearance to talk the matter over with you. But
now&mdash;well, I am a mother, and this is my daughter. You
speak of a dream. I supposed, naturally, that you were
anxious to make your engagement known by the medium
of an allegory. Well, I am perfectly well aware that someone
may have thought fit to confuse your mind on this
matter; in fact, I may say that I have my suspicions as to
the individual responsible for such a&mdash;&mdash;however, kindly
explain yourself, Prince; explain yourself quickly and
satisfactorily. You cannot be permitted to jest in this
fashion in a respectable house.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes&mdash;quite so, quite so; one should not jest in
respectable houses,</q> remarked the prince, still bewildered,
but beginning gradually to grow a little disconcerted.
</p>

<p>
<q>But that is no answer to my question, Prince. I ask
you to reply categorically. I insist upon your confirming&mdash;confirming
here and at once&mdash;the fact that this very evening
you made a proposal of marriage to my daughter!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite so&mdash;quite so; I am ready to confirm that! But
I have told the com&mdash;pany all about it, and Felisata
Michaelovna ac&mdash;tually guessed my dream!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><emph>Not dream!</emph> it was <emph>not</emph> a dream!</q> shouted Maria Alexandrovna
furiously. <q>It was not a dream, Prince, but you
were wide awake. Do you hear? Awake&mdash;you were
<emph>awake</emph>!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Awake?</q> cried the prince, rising from his chair in
astonishment. <q>Well, there you are, my friend; it has come
about just as you said,</q> he added, turning to Mosgliakoff.
<q>But I assure you, most es&mdash;teemed Maria Alexandrovna,
that you are under a del&mdash;usion. I am quite convinced
that I saw the whole scene in a dream!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Goodness gracious!</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do not disturb yourself, dear Maria Alexandrovna,</q> said
Natalia Dimitrievna, <q>probably the prince has forgotten;
he will recollect himself by and by.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I am astonished at you, Natalia Dimitrievna!</q> said the
now furious hostess. <q>As if people forget this sort of thing!
Excuse me, Prince, but are you laughing at us, or what are
you doing? Are you trying to act one of Dumas' heroes,
or Lauzun or Ferlacourt, or somebody? But, if you will
excuse me saying so, you are a good deal too old for that
sort of thing, and I assure you, your amiable little play-acting
will not do here! My daughter is not a French
viscountess! I tell you, this very evening and in this very
spot here, my daughter sang a ballad to you, and you,
amazed at the beauty of her singing, went down on your
knees and made her a proposal of marriage. I am not
talking in my sleep, am I? Surely I am wide awake?
Speak, Prince, am I asleep, or not?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, of course, of course&mdash;quite so. I don't
know,</q> said the bewildered old man. <q>I mean, I don't
think I am drea&mdash;ming now; but, a little while ago I <emph>was</emph>
asleep, you see; and while asleep I had this dream, that
I&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Goodness me, Prince, I tell you you were <emph>not</emph>
dreaming. <emph>Not dreaming</emph>, do you hear? <emph>Not</emph> dreaming!
What on earth do you mean? Are you raving, Prince, or
what?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes; deuce only knows. I don't know! It seems
to me I'm getting be&mdash;wildered,</q> said the prince, looking
around him in a state of considerable mental perturbation.
</p>

<p>
<q>But, my dear Prince, how can you possibly have <emph>dreamed</emph>
this, when I can tell you all the minutest details of your
proposal and of the circumstances attending it? You have
not told any of us of these details. How could I possibly
have known what you dreamed?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But, perhaps the prince <emph>did</emph> tell someone of his dream,
in detail,</q> remarked Natalia Dimitrievna.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, quite so&mdash;quite so! Perhaps I did tell someone
all about my dream, in detail,</q> said the now completely
lost and bewildered prince.
</p>

<p>
<q>Here's a nice comedy!</q> whispered Felisata Michaelovna
to her neighbour.
</p>

<p>
<q>My goodness me! this is too much for <emph>anybody's</emph>
patience!</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna, beside herself with
helpless rage. <q>Do you hear me, Prince? She sang you a
ballad&mdash;<emph>sang you a ballad</emph>! Surely you didn't dream that
too?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Certainly&mdash;cer&mdash;tainly, quite so. It really did seem to
me that she sang me a ballad,</q> murmured the prince; and a
ray of recollection seemed to flash across his face. <q>My
friend,</q> he continued, addressing Mosgliakoff, <q>I believe I
forgot to tell you, there was a ballad sung&mdash;a ballad all
about castles and knights; and some trou&mdash;badour or other
came in. Of course, of course, I remember it all quite well.
I recoll&mdash;ect I did turn over the ballad. It puzzles me
much, for now it seems as though I had really heard the
ballad, and not dreamt it all.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I confess, uncle,</q> said Mosgliakoff, as calmly as he could,
though his voice shook with agitation, <q>I confess I do not
see any difficulty in bringing your actual experience and
your dream into strict conformity; it is consistent enough.
You probably <emph>did</emph> hear the ballad. Miss Zenaida sings
beautifully; probably you all adjourned into this room and
Zenaida Afanassievna sang you the song. Of course, I was
not there myself, but in all probability this ballad reminded
you of old times; very likely it reminded you of that very
vicomtesse with whom you used once to sing, and of whom
you were speaking to-day; well, and then, when you went
up for your nap and lay down, thinking of the delightful impressions
made upon you by the ballad and all, you dreamed
that you were in love and made an offer of marriage to the
lady who had inspired you with that feeling.</q>
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna was struck dumb by this display of
barefaced audacity.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, ye&mdash;yes, my boy, yes, of course; that's exactly
how it really wa&mdash;as!</q> cried the prince, in an ecstasy of
delight. <q>Of course it was the de&mdash;lightful impressions
that caused me to dream it. I certainly re&mdash;member the
song; and then I went away and dreamed about my pro&mdash;posal,
and that I really wished to marry! The viscountess
was there too. How beautifully you have unravelled the
diffi&mdash;culty, my dear boy. Well, now I am quite convinced
that it was all a dream. Maria Alex&mdash;androvna! I assure
you, you are under a delu&mdash;usion: it was a dream. I should
not think of trifling with your feelings otherwise.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, indeed! Now I perceive very clearly whom we
have to thank for making this dirty mess of our affairs!</q>
cried Maria Alexandrovna, beside herself with rage, and
turning to Mosgliakoff: <q>You are the man, sir&mdash;the <emph>dishonest</emph>
person. It is you who stirred up this mud! It is
you that puzzled an unhappy old idiot into this eccentric
behaviour, because you yourself were rejected! But we
shall be quits, my friend, for this offence! You shall pay,
you shall pay! Wait a bit, my dishonest friend; wait a
bit!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Maria Alexandrovna!</q> cried Mosgliakoff, blushing in
his turn until he looked as red as a boiled lobster, <q>your
words are so, so&mdash;&mdash;to such an extent&mdash;I really don't know
how to express my opinion of you. No lady would ever
permit herself to&mdash;to&mdash;. At all events I am but protecting
my relative. You must allow that to <emph>allure</emph> an old
man like this is, is&mdash;&mdash;.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite so, quite so; <emph>allure</emph>,</q> began the prince, trying to
hide himself behind Mosgliakoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>Afanassy Matveyevitch!</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna, in
unnatural tones; <q>do you hear, sir, how these people are
shaming and insulting me? Have you <emph>quite</emph> exempted yourself
from all the responsibilities of a man? Or are you
actually a&mdash;a wooden block, instead of the father of a family?
What do you stand blinking there for? eh! Any other husband
would have wiped out such an insult to his family with
the blood of the offender long ago.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Wife!</q> began Afanassy, solemnly, delighted, and proud
to find that a need for him had sprung up for once in
his life. <q>Wife, are you quite certain, now, that <emph>you</emph> did
not dream all this? You might so easily have fallen asleep
and dreamed it, and then muddled it all up with what really
happened, you know, and so&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
But Afanassy Matveyevitch was never destined to complete
his ingenious, but unlucky guess.
</p>

<p>
Up to this moment the guests had all restrained themselves,
and had managed, cleverly enough, to keep up an
appearance of solid and judicial interest in the proceedings.
But at the first sound, almost, of Afanassy's voice, a burst of
uncontrollable laughter rose like a tempest from all parts
of the room.
</p>

<p>
Maria Alexandrovna, forgetting all the laws of propriety
in her fury, tried to rush at her unlucky consort; but she was
held back by force, or, doubtless, she would have scratched
out that gentleman's eyes.
</p>

<p>
Natalia Dimitrievna took advantage of the occasion
to add a little, if only a little, drop more of poison to the
bitter cup.
</p>

<p>
<q>But, dear Maria Alexandrovna,</q> she said, in the sweetest
honied tones, <q>perhaps it may be that it really <emph>was</emph> so, as your
husband suggests, and that you are actually under a strange
delusion?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How! What was a delusion?</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna,
not quite catching the remark.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, my dear Maria, I was saying, <emph>mightn't</emph> it have been
so, dear, after all? These sort of things <emph>do</emph> happen sometimes,
you know!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><emph>What</emph> sort of things do happen, eh? What are you
trying to do with me? What am I to make of you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, perhaps, dear, you really <emph>did</emph> dream it all!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What? <emph>dream</emph> it! <emph>I</emph> dreamed it? And you dare suggest
such a thing to me&mdash;straight to my face?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, why not? Perhaps it really was the case,</q> observed
Felisata Michaelovna.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, quite so, very likely it act&mdash;ually <emph>was</emph> the case,</q>
muttered the old prince.
</p>

<p>
<q>He, too&mdash;gracious Heaven!</q> cried poor Maria Alexandrovna,
wringing her hands.
</p>

<p>
<q>Dear me, how you do worry yourself, Maria Alexandrovna.
You should remember that dreams are sent us
by a good Providence. If Providence so wills it, there is no
more to be said. Providence gives the word, and we can
neither weep nor be angry at its dictum.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite so, quite so. We can't be a&mdash;angry about it,</q>
observed the prince.
</p>

<p>
<q>Look here; do you take me for a lunatic, or not?</q> said
Maria Alexandrovna. She spoke with difficulty, so dreadfully
was she panting with fury. It was more than flesh and
blood could stand. She hurriedly grasped a chair, and fell
fainting into it. There was a scene of great excitement.
</p>

<p>
<q>She has fainted in obedience to the laws of propriety!</q>
observed Natalia Dimitrievna to Mrs. Antipova. But at
this moment&mdash;at this moment when the general bewilderment
and confusion had reached its height, and when the
scene was strained to the last possible point of excitement,
another actor suddenly stepped to the front; one who had
been silent hitherto, but who immediately threw quite a
different complexion on the scene.
</p>



</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XIV.</head>

<p>
Zenaida, or Zina Afanassievna, was an individual of an
extremely romantic turn of mind.
</p>

<p>
I don't know whether it really was that she had read too
much of <q>that fool Shakespeare,</q> with her <q>little tutor
fellow,</q> as Maria Alexandrovna insisted; but, at all
events she was very romantic. However, never, in all her
experience of Mordasoff life, had Zina before made such an
ultra-romantic, or perhaps I might call it <emph>heroic</emph>, display as
on the occasion of the sally which I am now about to
describe.
</p>

<p>
Pale, and with resolution in her eyes, yet almost trembling
with agitation, and wonderfully beautiful in her anger
and scorn, she stepped to the front.
</p>

<p>
Gazing around at all, defiantly, she approached her
mother in the midst of the sudden silence which had fallen
on all present. Her mother roused herself from her swoon
at the first indication of a projected movement on Zina's
part, and she now opened her eyes.
</p>

<p>
<q>Mamma!</q> cried Zina, <q>why should we deceive anyone?
Why befoul ourselves with more lies? Everything
is so foul already that surely it is not worth while to bemean
ourselves any further by attempting to gloss over the filth!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Zina, Zina! what are you thinking of? <emph>Do</emph> recollect yourself!</q>
cried Maria Alexandrovna, frightened out of her
wits, and jumping briskly up from her chair.
</p>

<p>
<q>I told you, mamma&mdash;I told you before, that I should
not be able to last out the length of this shameful and
ignominious business!</q> continued Zina. <q>Surely we need
no further bemean and befoul ourselves! I will take it all
on myself, mamma. I am the basest of all, for lending
myself, of my own free will, to this abominable intrigue!
You are my mother; you love me, I know, and you wished
to arrange matters for my happiness, as you thought best,
and according to your lights. <emph>Your</emph> conduct, therefore,
is pardonable; but mine! oh, no! never, never!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Zina, Zina! surely you are not going to tell the whole
story? Oh! woe, woe! I felt that the knife would pierce
my heart!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, mamma, I shall tell all; I am disgraced, you&mdash;we
all of us are disgraced&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Zina, you are exaggerating! you are beside yourself;
and you don't know what you are saying. And why say
anything about it? The ignominy and disgrace is not on our
side, dear child; I will show in a moment that it is not on
our side!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, mamma, no!</q> cried Zina, with a quiver of rage in
her voice, <q>I do not wish to remain silent any longer before
these&mdash;persons, whose opinion I despise, and who have
come here for the purpose of laughing at us. I do
not wish to stand insult from any one of them; none of
them have any right to throw dirt at me; every single one
of them would be ready at any moment to do things thirty
times as bad as anything either I or you have done or
would do! Dare they, <emph>can</emph> they constitute themselves our
judges?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Listen to that!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There's a pretty little speech for you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, that's <emph>us</emph> she's abusing</q>!
</p>

<p>
<q>A nice sort of creature she is herself!</q>
</p>

<p>
These and other such-like exclamations greeted the
conclusion of Zina's speech.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, she simply doesn't know what she's talking about!</q>
observed Natalia Dimitrievna.
</p>

<p>
We will make a digression, and remark that Natalia
Dimitrievna was quite right there!
</p>

<p>
For if Zina did not consider these women competent to
judge herself, why should she trouble herself to make those
exposures and admissions which she proposed to reveal in
their presence? Zina was in much too great a hurry. (She
always was,&mdash;so the best heads in Mordasoff had agreed!)
All might have been set right; all might have been satisfactorily
arranged! Maria Alexandrovna was a great deal
to blame this night, too! She had been too much <q>in a
hurry,</q> like her daughter,&mdash;and too arrogant! She should
have simply raised the laugh at the old prince's expense, and
turned him out of the house! But Zina, in despite of all
common sense (as indicated above), and of the sage opinions
of all Mordasoff, addressed herself to the prince:
</p>

<p>
<q>Prince,</q> she said to the old man, who actually rose
from his arm-chair to show his respect for the speaker, so
much was he struck by her at this moment!&mdash;<q>Prince
forgive us; we have deceived you; we entrapped you&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><emph>Will</emph> you be quiet, you wretched girl?</q> cried Maria
Alexandrovna, wild with rage.
</p>

<p>
<q>My dear young lady&mdash;my dear child, my darling child!</q>
murmured the admiring prince.
</p>

<p>
But the proud haughty character of Zina had led her on
to cross the barrier of all propriety;&mdash;she even forgot her
own mother who lay fainting at her feet&mdash;a victim to the
self-exposure her daughter indulged in.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, prince, we both cheated you. Mamma was in fault
in that she determined that I must marry you; and I in
that I consented thereto. We filled you with wine; I sang
to you and postured and posed for your admiration. We
tricked you, a weak defenceless old man, we <emph>tricked</emph> you (as
Mr. Mosgliakoff would express it!) for the sake of your
wealth, and your rank. All this was shockingly mean, and
I freely admit the fact. But I swear to you, Prince, that I
consented to all this baseness from motives which were <emph>not</emph>
base. I wished,&mdash;but what a wretch I am! it is doubly
mean to justify one's conduct in such a case as this! But I
will tell you, Prince, that if I had accepted anything from
you, I should have made it up to you for it, by being your
plaything, your servant, your&mdash;your ballet dancer, your slave&mdash;anything
you wished. I had sworn to this, and I should
have kept my oath.</q>
</p>

<p>
A severe spasm at the throat stopped her for a moment;
while all the guests sat and listened like so many blocks of
wood, their eyes and mouths wide open.
</p>

<p>
This unexpected, and to them perfectly unintelligible sally
on Zina's part had utterly confounded them. The old
prince alone was touched to tears, though he did not understand
half that Zina said.
</p>

<p>
<q>But I will marry you, my beau&mdash;t&mdash;iful child, I <emph>will</emph> marry
you, if you like</q>&mdash;he murmured, <q>and est&mdash;eem it a great
honour, too! But I as&mdash;sure you it was all a dream,&mdash;what
does it mat&mdash;ter what I dream? Why should you take
it so to heart? I don't seem to under&mdash;stand it all; please
explain, my dear friend, what it all means!</q> he added, to
Paul.
</p>

<p>
<q>As for you, Pavel Alexandrovitch,</q> Zina recommenced,
also turning to Mosgliakoff, <q>you whom I had made up my
mind, at one time, to look upon as my future husband;
you who have now so cruelly revenged yourself upon me;
must you needs have allied yourself to these people here,
whose object at all times is to humiliate and shame me?
And you said that you loved me! However, it is not for
me to preach moralities to you, for I am worse than all! I
wronged you, distinctly, in holding out false hopes and half
promises. I never loved you, and if I had agreed to be
your wife, it would have been solely with the view of getting
away from here, out of this accursed town, and free of all
this meanness and baseness. However, I swear to you that
had I married you, I should have been a good and faithful
wife! You have taken a cruel vengeance upon me, and if
that flatters your pride, then&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Zina!</q> cried Mosgliakoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>If you still hate me&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Zina!!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>If you ever did love me&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Zenaida Afanassievna!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Zina, Zina&mdash;my child!</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna.
</p>

<p>
<q>I am a blackguard, Zina&mdash;a blackguard, and nothing
else!</q> cried Mosgliakoff; while all the assembled ladies
gave way to violent agitation. Cries of amazement and
of wrath broke upon the silence; but Mosgliakoff himself
stood speechless and miserable, without a thought and
without a word to plead for him!
</p>

<p>
<q>I am an ass, Zina,</q> he cried at last, in an outburst of
wild despair,&mdash;<q>an ass! oh far, far worse than an ass. But
I will prove to you, Zina, that even an ass can behave like
a generous human being! Uncle, I cheated you! I, I&mdash;it
was I who cheated you: you were <emph>not</emph> asleep,&mdash;you were
wide awake when you made this lady an offer of marriage!
And I&mdash;scoundrel that I was&mdash;out of revenge because I was
rejected by her myself, persuaded you that you had dreamed
it all!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Dear me, what wonderful and interesting revelations
we are being treated to now!</q> whispered Natalia to Mrs.
Antipova.
</p>

<p>
<q>My dear friend,</q> replied the prince, <q>com&mdash;pose yourself,
do! I assure you&mdash;you quite start&mdash;led me with that
sudden ex&mdash;clamation of yours! Besides, you are labouring
under a delusion;&mdash;I will marr&mdash;y the lady, of course, if
ne&mdash;cessary. But you told me, yourself, it was all a
dre&mdash;eam!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, how am I to tell you? Do show me, somebody, how
to explain to him! Uncle, uncle! this is an important
matter&mdash;a most important family affair! Think of that, uncle&mdash;just
try to realise that&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Wait a bit, my boy&mdash;wait a bit: let me think! First
there was my coachman, Theophile&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, never mind Theophile now, for goodness sake!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Of course we need not waste time over The&mdash;ophile.
Well&mdash;then came Na&mdash;poleon; and then we seemed to
be sitting at tea, and some la&mdash;dy came and ate up all our
su&mdash;gar!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But, uncle!</q> cried Mosgliakoff, at his wits' end, <q>it
was Maria Alexandrovna herself told us that anecdote about
Natalia Dimitrievna! I was here myself and heard it!&mdash;I
was a blackguard, and listened at the keyhole!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How, Maria Alexandrovna!</q> cried Natalia, <q>you've
told the prince too, have you, that I stole sugar out of your
basin? So I come to you to steal your sugar, do I, eh!
do I?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Get away from me!</q> cried Maria Alexandrovna, with
the abandonment of utter despair.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, dear no! I shall do nothing of the sort, Maria Alexandrovna!
I steal your sugar, do I? I tell you you shall
not talk of me like that, madam&mdash;you dare not! I have
long suspected you of spreading this sort of rubbish abroad
about me! Sophia Petrovna came and told me all about
it. So I stole your sugar, did I, eh?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But, my dear la&mdash;dies!</q> said the prince, <q>it was only
part of a dream! What do my dreams matter?&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Great tub of a woman!</q> muttered Maria Alexandrovna
through her teeth.
</p>

<p>
<q>What! what! I'm a tub, too, am I?</q> shrieked Natalia
Dimitrievna. <q>And what are you yourself, pray? Oh, I
have long known that you call me a tub, madam. Never
mind!&mdash;at all events my husband is a man, madam, and not
a fool, like yours!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes&mdash;quite so! I remember there <emph>was</emph> something
about a tub, too!</q> murmured the old man, with a
vague recollection of his late conversation with Maria
Alexandrovna.
</p>

<p>
<q>What&mdash;<emph>you</emph>, too? <emph>you</emph> join in abusing a respectable
woman of noble extraction, do you? How dare you call
me names, prince&mdash;you wretched old one-legged misery!
I'm a tub am I, you one-legged old abomination?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Wha&mdash;at, madam, I one-legged?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes&mdash;one-legged and toothless, sir; that's what you are!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, and one-eyed too!</q> shouted Maria Alexandrovna.
</p>

<p>
<q>And what's more, you wear stays instead of having your
own ribs!</q> added Natalia Dimitrievna.
</p>

<p>
<q>His face is all on wire springs!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He hasn't a hair of his own to swear by!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Even the old fool's moustache is stuck on!</q> put in
Maria Alexandrovna.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, Ma&mdash;arie Alexandrovna, give me the credit of
having a nose of my ve&mdash;ry own, at all events!</q> said the
prince, overwhelmed with confusion under these unexpected
disclosures. <q>My friend, it must have been you betrayed
me! <emph>you</emph> must have told them that my hair is stuck on?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Uncle, what an idea, I&mdash;&mdash;!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>My dear boy, I can't stay here any lon&mdash;ger, take me
away somewhere&mdash;<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>quelle soci&eacute;t&eacute;</foreign>! Where have you brought
me to, eh?&mdash;Gracious Hea&mdash;eaven, what dreadful soc&mdash;iety!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Idiot! scoundrel!</q> shrieked Maria Alexandrovna.
</p>

<p>
<q>Goodness!</q> said the unfortunate old prince. <q>I
can't quite remember just now what I came here for at all&mdash;I
suppose I shall reme&mdash;mber directly. Take me away,
quick, my boy, or I shall be torn to pieces here! Besides,
I have an i&mdash;dea that I want to make a note of&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Come along, uncle&mdash;it isn't very late; I'll take you over
to an hotel at once, and I'll move over my own things too.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ye&mdash;yes, of course, a ho&mdash;tel! Good-bye, my charming
child; you alone, you&mdash;are the only vir&mdash;tuous one of them
all; you are a no&mdash;oble child. Good-bye, my charming
girl! Come along, my friend;&mdash;oh, good gra&mdash;cious, what
people!</q>
</p>

<p>
I will not attempt to describe the end of this disagreeable
scene, after the prince's departure.
</p>

<p>
The guests separated in a hurricane of scolding and
abuse and mutual vituperation, and Maria Alexandrovna was
at last left alone amid the ruins and relics of her departed
glory.
</p>

<p>
Alas, alas! Power, glory, weight&mdash;all had disappeared
in this one unfortunate evening. Maria Alexandrovna
quite realised that there was no chance of her ever again
mounting to the height from which she had now fallen.
Her long preeminence and despotism over society in general
had collapsed.
</p>

<p>
What remained to her? Philosophy? She was wild with
the madness of despair all night! Zina was dishonoured&mdash;scandals
would circulate, never-ceasing scandals; and&mdash;oh!
it was dreadful!
</p>

<p>
As a faithful historian, I must record that poor Afanassy
was the scapegoat this night; he <q>caught it</q> so terribly
that he eventually disappeared; he had hidden himself in
the garret, and was there starved to death almost, with cold,
all night.
</p>

<p>
The morning came at last; but it brought nothing good
with it! Misfortunes never come singly.
</p>



</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XV.</head>

<p>
If fate makes up its mind to visit anyone with misfortune,
there is no end to its malice! This fact has often been
remarked by thinkers; and, as if the ignominy of last
night were not enough, the same malicious destiny had prepared
for this family more, yea, and worse&mdash;evils to come!
</p>

<p>
By ten o'clock in the morning a strange and almost
incredible rumour was in full swing all over the town: it
was received by society, of course, with full measure of spiteful
joy, just as we all love to receive delightfully scandalous
stories of anyone about us.
</p>

<p>
<q>To lose one's sense of shame to such an extent!</q>
people said one to another.
</p>

<p>
<q>To humiliate oneself so, and to neglect the first rules
of propriety! To loose the bands of decency altogether like
this, really!</q> etc., etc.
</p>

<p>
But here is what had happened.
</p>

<p>
Early in the morning, something after six o'clock, a poor
piteous-looking old woman came hurriedly to the door of
Maria Alexandrovna's house, and begged the maid to wake
Miss Zina up as quickly, as possible,&mdash;<emph>only</emph> Miss Zina, and
very quietly, so that her mother should not hear of it, if
possible.
</p>

<p>
Zina, pale and miserable, ran out to the old woman
immediately.
</p>

<p>
The latter fell at Zina's feet and kissed them and begged
her with tears to come with her at once to see poor Va&iacute;sia,
her son, who had been so bad, <emph>so</emph> bad all night that she did
not think he could live another day.
</p>

<p>
The old woman told Zina that Va&iacute;sia had sent to beg
her to come and bid him farewell in this his death hour: he
conjured her to come by all the blessed angels, and by all
their past&mdash;otherwise he must die in despair.
</p>

<p>
Zina at once decided to go, in spite of the fact that, by so
doing, she would be justifying all the scandal and slanders
disseminated about her in former days, as to the intercepted
letter, her visits to him, and so on. Without a word to her
mother, then, she donned her cloak and started off with the
old woman, passing through the whole length of the town,
into one of the poorest slums of Mordasof&mdash;and stopped
at a little low wretched house, with small miserable windows,
and snow piled round the basement for warmth.
</p>

<p>
In this house, in a tiny room, more than half of which
was occupied by an enormous stove, on a wretched bed, and
covered with a miserably thin quilt, lay a young man, pale
and haggard: his eyes were ablaze with the fire of fever, his
hands were dry and thin, and he was breathing with difficulty
and very hoarsely. He looked as though he might
have been handsome once, but disease had put its finger on
his features and made them dreadful to look upon and sad
withal, as are so many dying consumptive patients' faces.
</p>

<p>
His old mother who had fed herself for a year past with
the conviction that her son would recover, now saw at last
that Va&iacute;sia was not to live. She stood over him, bowed
down with her grief&mdash;tearless, and looked and looked, and
could not look enough; and felt, but could not realize, that
this dear son of hers must in a few days be buried in the
miserable Mordasof churchyard, far down beneath the
snow and frozen earth!
</p>

<p>
But Va&iacute;sia was not looking at her at this moment! His
poor suffering face was at rest now, and happy; for he saw
before him the dear image which he had thought of, dreamed
of, and loved through all the long sad nights of his illness,
for the last year and a half! He realised that she forgave
him, and had come, like an angel of God, to tell him of her
forgiveness, here, on his deathbed.
</p>

<p>
She pressed his hands, wept over him, stood and smiled
over him, looked at him once more with those wonderful
eyes of hers, and all the past, the undying ever-present past
rose up before the mind's eye of the dying man. The spark
of life flashed up again in his soul, as though to show, now
that it was about to die out for ever on this earth, how hard,
how hard it was to see so sweet a light fade away.
</p>

<p>
<q>Zina, Zina!</q> he said, <q rend='pre'>my Zina, do not weep; don't
grieve, Zina, don't remind me that I must die! Let me gaze
at you, so&mdash;so,&mdash;and feel that our two souls have come together
once more&mdash;that you have forgiven me! Let me kiss
your dear hands again, as I used, and so let me die without
noticing the approach of death.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>How thin you have grown, Zina! and how sweetly you are
looking at me now, my Zina! Do you remember how you
used to laugh, in bygone days? Oh, Zina, my angel, I shall
not ask you to forgive me,&mdash;I will not remember anything
about&mdash;that, you know what! for if you <emph>do</emph> forgive me, I
can never forgive myself!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>All the long, long nights, Zina, I have lain here and
thought, and thought; and I have long since decided that I
had better die, Zina; for I am not fit to live!</q>
</p>

<p>
Zina wept, and silently pressed his hands, as though she
would stop him talking so.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why do you cry so?</q> continued the sick man. <q>Is
it because I am dying? but all the past is long since dead
and buried, Zina, my angel! You are wiser than I am,
you know I am a bad, wicked man; surely you cannot
love me still? Do you know what it has cost me to
realise that I am a bad man? I, who have always prided
myself before the world&mdash;and what on? Purity of heart,
generosity of aim! Yes, Zina, so I did, while we read
Shakespeare; and in theory I was pure and generous. Yet,
how did I prove these qualities in practice?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, don't! don't!</q> sobbed Zina, <q>you are not fair to
yourself: don't talk like this, please don't!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't stop me, Zina! You forgave me, my angel; I
know you forgave me long ago, but you must have judged
me, and you know what sort of man I really am; and that
is what tortures me so! I am unworthy of your love, Zina!
And you were good and true, not only in theory, but in
practice too! You told your mother you would marry me,
and no one else, and you would have kept your word! Do
you know, Zina, I never realized before what you would sacrifice
in marrying me! I could not even see that you might
die of hunger if you did so! All I thought of was that you
would be the bride of a great poet (in the future), and I
could not understand your reasons for wishing to delay our
union! So I reproached you and bullied you, and despised
you and suspected you, and at last I committed the crime
of showing your letter! I was not even a scoundrel at that
moment! I was simply a worm-man. Ah! how you must
have despised me! No, it is well that I am dying; it is well
that you did not marry me! I should not have understood
your sacrifice, and I should have worried you, and perhaps,
in time, have learned to hate you, and ... but now it is
good, it is best so! my bitter tears can at least cleanse my
heart before I die. Ah! Zina! Zina! love me, love me as
you did before for a little, little while! just for the last
hour of my life. I know I am not worthy of it, but&mdash;oh, my
angel, my Zina!</q>
</p>

<p>
Throughout this speech Zina, sobbing herself, had several
times tried to stop the speaker; but he would not listen.
He felt that he must unburden his soul by speaking out,
and continued to talk&mdash;though with difficulty, panting, and
with choking and husky utterance.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, if only you had never seen me and never loved
me,</q> said Zina, <q>you would have lived on now! Ah, <emph>why</emph>
did we ever meet?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, no, darling, don't blame yourself because I am
dying! think of all my self-love, my romanticism! I am to
blame for all, myself! Did they ever tell you my story in
full? Do you remember, three years ago, there was a
criminal here sentenced to death? This man heard that a
criminal was never executed whilst ill! so he got hold of
some wine, mixed tobacco in it, and drank it. The effect
was to make him so dreadfully sick, with blood-spitting,
that his lungs became affected; he was taken to a hospital,
and a few weeks after he died of virulent consumption!
Well, on that day, you know, after the letter, it struck me
that I would do the same; and why do you think I chose
consumption? Because I was afraid of any more sudden
death? Perhaps. But, oh, Zina! believe me, a romantic
nonsense played a great part in it; at all events, I had an
idea that it would be striking and grand for me to be lying
here, dying of consumption, and you standing and wringing
your hands for woe that <emph>love</emph> should have brought me
to this! You should come, I thought, and beg my pardon on
your knees, and I should forgive you and die in your arms!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, don't! don't!</q> said Zina, <q>don't talk of it now,
dear! you are not really like that. Think of our happy
days together, think of something else&mdash;not that, not that!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, but it's so bitter to me, darling; and that's why I
must speak of it. I havn't seen you for a year and a half,
you know, and all that time I have been alone; and I
don't think there was one single minute of all that time when
I have not thought of you, my angel, Zina! And, oh! how I
longed to do something to earn a better opinion from you!
Up to these very last days I have never believed that I
should really die; it has not killed me all at once, you
know. I have long walked about with my lungs affected.
For instance, I have longed to become a great poet suddenly,
to publish a poem such as has never appeared before
on this earth; I intended to pour my whole soul and being
into it, so that wherever I was, or wherever <emph>you</emph> were, I
should always be with you and remind you of myself in my
poems! And my greatest longing of all was that you should
think it all over and say to yourself at last some day, 'No,
he is not such a wretch as I thought, after all!' It was
stupid of me, Zina, stupid&mdash;stupid&mdash;wasn't it, darling?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, no, Va&iacute;sia&mdash;no!</q> cried Zina. She fell on his
breast and kissed his poor hot, dry hands.
</p>

<p>
<q>And, oh! how jealous I have been of you all this time,
Zina! I think I should have died if I had heard of your
wedding. I kept a watch over you, you know; I had a spy&mdash;there!</q>
(he nodded towards his mother). <q>She used to
go over and bring me news. You never loved Mosgliakoff&mdash;now
<emph>did</emph> you, Zina? Oh, my darling, my darling, will you
remember me when I am dead? Oh, I know you will;
but years go by, Zina, and hearts grow cold, and yours will
cool too, and you'll forget me, Zina!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, no, never! I shall never marry. You are my
first love, and my only&mdash;only&mdash;undying love!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But all things die, Zina, even our memories, and our
good and noble feelings die also, and in their place comes
reason. No, no, Zina, be happy, and live long. Love
another if you can, you cannot love a poor dead man for
ever! But think of me now and then, if only seldom;
don't think of my faults: forgive them! For oh, Zina, there
was good in that sweet love of ours as well as evil. Oh,
golden, golden days never to be recalled! Listen, darling,
I have always loved the sunset hour&mdash;remember me at that
time, will you? Oh no, no! why must I die? oh <emph>how</emph> I
should love to live on now. Think of that time&mdash;oh, just
think of it! it was all spring then, the sun shone so bright,
the flowers were so sweet, ah me! and look, now&mdash;look!</q>
</p>

<p>
And the poor thin finger pointed to the frozen window-pane.
Then he seized Zina's hand and pressed it tight over
his eyes, and sighed bitterly&mdash;bitterly! His sobs nearly
burst his poor suffering breast.... And so he continued
suffering and talking all the long day. Zina comforted
and soothed him as she best could, but she too was
full of deadly grief and pain. She told him&mdash;she promised
him&mdash;never to forget; that she would never love again as
she loved him; and he believed her and wept, and smiled
again, and kissed her hands. And so the day passed.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile, Maria Alexandrovna had sent some ten times
for Zina, begging her not to ruin her reputation irretrievably.
At last, at dusk, she determined to go herself; she was out
of her wits with terror and grief.
</p>

<p>
Having called Zina out into the next room, she proceeded
to beg and pray her, on her knees, <q>to spare this last
dagger at her heart!</q>
</p>

<p>
Zina had come out from the sick-room ill: her head was
on fire,&mdash;she heard, but could not comprehend, what her
mother said; and Marie Alexandrovna was obliged to leave
the house again in despair, for Zina had determined to sit
up all night with Va&iacute;sia.
</p>

<p>
She never left his bedside, but the poor fellow grew worse
and worse. Another day came, but there was no hope that
the sick man would see its close. His old mother walked
about as though she had lost all control of her actions; grief
had turned her head for the time; she gave her son
medicines, but he would none of them! His death agony
dragged on and on! He could not speak now, and only
hoarse inarticulate sounds proceeded from his throat. To
the very last instant he stared and stared at Zina, and never
took his eyes off her; and when their light failed them he
still groped with uncertain fingers for her hand, to press
and fondle it in his own!
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the short winter day was waning! And
when at even the last sunbeam gilded the frozen window-pane
of the little room, the soul of the sufferer fled in
pursuit of it out of the emaciated body that had kept it
prisoner.
</p>

<p>
The old mother, seeing that there was nothing left her
now but the lifeless body of her beloved Va&iacute;sia, wrung her
hands, and with a loud cry flung herself on his dead
breast.
</p>

<p>
<q>This is your doing, you viper, you cursed snake,</q> she
yelled to Zina, in her despair; <q>it was you ruined and
killed him, you wicked, wretched girl.</q> But Zina heard
nothing. She stood over the dead body like one bereft of
her senses.
</p>

<p>
At last she bent over him, made the sign of the Cross,
kissed him, and mechanically left the room. Her eyes
were ablaze, her head whirled. Two nights without sleep,
combined with her turbulent feelings, were almost too much
for her reason; she had a sort of confused consciousness
that all her past had just been torn out of her heart, and
that a new life was beginning for her, dark and threatening.
</p>

<p>
But she had not gone ten paces when Mosgliakoff
suddenly seemed to start up from the earth at her feet.
</p>

<p>
He must have been waiting for her here.
</p>

<p>
<q>Zenaida Afanassievna,</q> he began, peering all around
him in what looked like timid haste; it was still pretty light.
<q>Zenaida Afanassievna, of course I am an ass, or, if you
please, perhaps not quite an ass, for I really think I am
acting rather generously this time. Excuse my blundering,
but I am rather confused, from a variety of causes.</q>
</p>

<p>
Zina glanced at him almost unconsciously, and silently
went on her way. There was not much room for two on the
narrow pavement, and as Zina did not make way for Paul,
the latter was obliged to walk on the road at the side, which
he did, never taking his eyes off her face.
</p>

<p>
<q>Zenaida Afanassievna,</q> he continued, <q>I have
thought it all over, and if you are agreeable I am willing to
renew my proposal of marriage. I am even ready to forget
all that has happened; all the ignominy of the last two days,
and to forgive it&mdash;but on one condition: that while we are
still here our engagement is to remain a strict secret. You
will depart from this place as soon as ever you can, and I
shall quietly follow you. We will be married secretly,
somewhere, so that nobody shall know anything about it;
and then we'll be off to St. Petersburg by express post&mdash;don't
take more than a small bag&mdash;eh? What say you,
Zenaida Afanassievna; tell me quick, please, I can't stay
here. We might be seen together, you know.</q>
</p>

<p>
Zina did not answer a word; she only looked at Mosgliakoff;
but it was such a look that he understood all instantly,
bowed, and disappeared down the next lane.
</p>

<p>
<q>Dear me,</q> he said to himself, <q>what's the meaning of
this? The day before yesterday she became so jolly humble,
and blamed herself all round. I've come on the wrong day,
evidently!</q>
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile event followed event in Mordasof.
</p>

<p>
A very tragical circumstance occurred.
</p>

<p>
The old prince, who moved over to the hotel with
Mosgliakoff, fell very ill that same night, dangerously ill.
All Mordasof knew of it in the morning; the doctor never
left his side. That evening a consultation of all the local
medical talent was held over the old man (the invitations
to which were issued in Latin); but in spite of the Latin
and all they could do for him, the poor prince was quite off
his head; he raved and asked his doctor to sing him some
ballad or other; raved about wigs, and occasionally cried
out as though frightened.
</p>

<p>
The Mordasof doctors decided that the hospitality of
the town had given the prince inflammation of the stomach,
which had somehow <q>gone to the head.</q>
</p>

<p>
There might be some subordinate moral causes to
account for the attack; but at all events he ought to have
died long ago; and so he would certainly die now.
</p>

<p>
In this last conclusion they were not far wrong; for the
poor old prince breathed his last three days after, at the
hotel.
</p>

<p>
This event impressed the Mordasof folk considerably.
No one had expected such a tragical turn of affairs. They
went in troops to the hotel to view the poor old body, and
there they wagged their heads wisely and ended by passing
severe judgment upon <q>the murderers of the unfortunate
Prince,</q>&mdash;meaning thereby, of course, Maria Alexandrovna
and her daughter. They predicted that this matter would
go further. Mosgliakoff was in a dreadful state of perturbation:
he did not know what to do with the body. Should
he take it back to Donchanof! or what? Perhaps he would
be held responsible for the old man's death, as he had
brought him here? He did not like the look of things. The
Mordasof people were less than useless for advice, they
were all far too frightened to hazard a word.
</p>

<p>
But suddenly the scene changed.
</p>

<p>
One fine evening a visitor arrived&mdash;no less a person
than the eminent Prince Shepetiloff, a young man of thirty-five,
with colonel's epaulettes, a relative of the dead man.
His arrival created a great stir among all classes at Mordasof.
</p>

<p>
It appeared that this gentleman had lately left St.
Petersburg, and had called in at Donchanof. Finding no
one there, he had followed the prince to Mordasof, where
the news and circumstances of the old man's death fell
upon him like a thunder-clap!
</p>

<p>
Even the governor felt a little guilty while detailing the
story of the prince's death: all Mordasof felt and looked
guilty.
</p>

<p>
This visitor took the matter entirely into his own hands,
and Mosgliakoff made himself scarce before the presence of
the prince's real nephew, and disappeared, no one knew
whither.
</p>

<p>
The body was taken to the monastery, and all the
Mordasof ladies flocked thither to the funeral. It was
rumoured that Maria Alexandrovna was to be present, and
that she was to go on her knees before the coffin, and
loudly pray for pardon; and that all this was in conformity
with the laws of the country.
</p>

<p>
Of course this was all nonsense, and Maria Alexandrovna
never went near the place!
</p>

<p>
I forgot to state that the latter had carried off Zina to the
country house, not deeming it possible to continue to live
in the town. There she sat, and trembled over all the
second-hand news she could get hold of as to events
occurring at Mordasof.
</p>

<p>
The funeral procession passed within half a mile of her
country house; so that Maria Alexandrovna could get a good
view of the long train of carriages looking black against
the white snow roads; but she could not bear the sight,
and left the window.
</p>

<p>
Before the week was out, she and her daughter moved to
Moscow, taking Afanassy Matveyevitch with them; and,
within a month, the country house and town house were
both for sale.
</p>

<p>
And so Mordasof lost its most eminent inhabitant for ever!
</p>

<p>
Afanassy Matveyevitch was said to be for sale with the
country house.
</p>

<p>
A year&mdash;two years went by, and Mordasof had quite forgotten
Maria Alexandrovna, or nearly so! Alas! so wags
the world! It was said that she had bought another estate,
and had moved over to some other provincial capital; where,
of course, she had everybody under her thumb; that Zina
was not yet married; and that Afanassy Matveyevitch&mdash;but
why repeat all this nonsense? None of it was true; it
was but rumour!&mdash;&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<milestone unit="tb" rend="rule: 50%" />
</p>

<p>
It is three years since I wrote the last words of the above
chronicles of Mordasof, and whoever would have believed
that I should have to unfold my MS., and add another
piece of news to my narrative?
</p>

<p>
Well, to business!&mdash;
</p>

<p>
Let's begin with Paul Mosgliakoff.&mdash;After leaving
Mordasof, he went straight to St. Petersburg, where he very
soon obtained the clerkship he had applied for. He then
promptly forgot all about Mordasof, and the events enacted
there. He enjoyed life, went into society, fell in love,
made another offer of marriage, and had to swallow
another snub; became disgusted with Petersburg life, and
joined an expedition to one of the remote quarters of our
vast empire.
</p>

<p>
This expedition passed through its perils of land and
water, and arrived in due course at the capital of the remote
province which was its destination.
</p>

<p>
There the members were well received by the governor,
and a ball was arranged for their entertainment.
</p>

<p>
Mosgliakoff was delighted. He donned his best Petersburg
uniform, and proceeded to the large ball-room with
the full intention of producing a great and startling effect.
His first duty was to make his bow to the governor-general's
lady, of whom it was rumoured that she was young, and very
lovely.
</p>

<p>
He advanced then, with some little <q>swagger,</q> but was
suddenly rooted to the spot with amazement. Before him
stood Zina, beautifully dressed, proud and haughty, and
sparkling with diamonds! She did not recognize him; her
eyes rested a moment on his face, and then passed on to
glance at some other person.
</p>

<p>
Paul immediately departed to a safe and quiet corner,
and there button-holed a young civilian whom he questioned,
and from whom he learned certain most interesting
facts. He learned that the governor-general had married
a very rich and very lovely lady in Moscow, two years
since; that his wife was certainly very beautiful, but, at the
same time, excessively proud and haughty, and danced
with none but generals. That the governor's lady had a
mother, a lady of rank and fashion, who had followed them
from Moscow; that this lady was very clever and wise, but
that even she was quite under the thumb of her daughter;
as for the general (the governor), he doted on his wife.
</p>

<p>
Mosgliakoff inquired after our old friend Afanassy; but
in their <q>remote province</q> nothing was known of that
gentleman.
</p>

<p>
Feeling a little more at home presently, Paul began to
walk about the room, and shortly espied Maria Alexandrovna
herself. She was wonderfully dressed, and was surrounded
by a bevy of ladies who evidently dwelt in the
glory of her patronage: she appeared to be exceedingly
amiable to them&mdash;wonderfully so!
</p>

<p>
Paul plucked up courage and introduced himself. Maria
Alexandrovna seemed to give a shudder at first sight of
him, but in an instant she was herself again. She was kind
enough to recognise Paul, and to ask him all sorts of questions
as to his Petersburg experiences, and so on. She
never said a word about Mordasof, however. She behaved
as though no such place existed.
</p>

<p>
After a minute or so, and having dropped a question as
to some Petersburg prince whom Paul had never so much
as heard of, she turned to speak to another young gentleman
standing by, and in a second or two was entirely
oblivious of Mosgliakoff. With a sarcastic smile our friend
passed on into the large hall. Feeling offended&mdash;though
he knew not why&mdash;he decided not to dance. So he leant
his back against one of the pillars, and for a couple of hours
did nothing but follow Zina about with his eyes. But alas!
all the grace of his figure and attitude, and all the fascinations
of his general appearance were lost upon her, she
never looked at him.
</p>

<p>
At last, with legs stiff from standing, tired, hungry, and
feeling miserable generally, he went home. Here he tossed
about half the night thinking of the past, and next morning,
having the chance of joining a branch party of his expedition,
he accepted the opportunity with delight, and left the
town at once.
</p>

<p>
The bells tinkled, the horses trotted gaily along, kicking
up snowballs as they went. Paul Mosgliakoff fell to thinking,
then he fell to snoring, and so he continued until the
third station from the start; there he awoke fresh and jolly,
and with the new scenery came newer, and healthier, and
pleasanter thoughts.
</p>

<p rend="font-size: large;text-align: center"><lb /><lb />
THE END OF <q>UNCLE'S DREAM.</q>
</p>


</div>


<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE PERMANENT HUSBAND.</head>
<p></p>
</div>


<div>
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER I.</head>

<p>
Summer had come, and Velchaninoff, contrary to his expectations,
was still in St. Petersburg. His trip to the
south of Russia had fallen through, and there seemed no
end to the business which had detained him.
</p>

<p>
This business&mdash;which was a lawsuit as to certain property&mdash;had
taken a very disagreeable aspect. Three months ago
the thing had appeared to be by no means complicated&mdash;in
fact, there had seemed to be scarcely any question as to
the rights and wrongs of the matter, but all seemed to change
suddenly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Everything else seems to have changed for the worse,
too!</q> said Velchaninoff to himself, over and over again.
</p>

<p>
He was employing a clever lawyer&mdash;an eminent man, and
an expensive one, too; but in his impatience and suspicion
he began to interfere in the matter himself. He read
and wrote papers&mdash;all of which the lawyer put into his waste-paper
basket&mdash;<foreign rend='italic'>holus bolus</foreign>; called in continually at the
courts and offices, made inquiries, and confused and worried
everybody concerned in the matter; so at least the lawyer
declared, and begged him for mercy's sake to go away to
the country somewhere.
</p>

<p>
But he could not make up his mind to do so. He stayed
in town and enjoyed the dust, and the hot nights, and
the closeness of the air of St. Petersburg, things which are
enough to destroy anyone's nerves. His lodgings were
somewhere near the Great Theatre; he had lately taken
them, and did not like them. Nothing went well with him;
his hypochondria increased with each day, and he had long
been a victim to that disorder.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff was a man who had seen a great deal of the
world; he was not quite young, thirty-eight years old&mdash;perhaps
thirty-nine, or so; and all this <q>old age,</q> as he called
it, had <q>fallen upon him quite unawares.</q> However, as he
himself well understood, he had aged more in the <emph>quality</emph>
than in the number of the years of his life; and if his infirmities
were really creeping upon him, they must have
come from within and not from outside causes. He looked
young enough still. He was a tall, stout man, with light-brown
thick hair, without a suspicion of white about it,
and a light beard that reached half way down his chest. At
first sight you might have supposed him to be of a lax, careless
disposition or character, but on studying him more
closely you would have found that, on the contrary, the man
was decidedly a stickler for the proprieties of this world, and
withal brought up in the ways and graces of the very best
society. His manners were very good&mdash;free but graceful&mdash;in
spite of this lately-acquired habit of grumbling and reviling
things in general. He was still full of the most
perfect, aristocratic self-confidence: probably he did not
himself suspect to how great an extent this was so, though
he was a most decidedly intelligent, I may say clever, even
talented man. His open, healthy-looking face was distinguished
by an almost feminine refinement, which quality
gained him much attention from the fair sex. He had
large blue eyes&mdash;eyes which ten years ago had known well
how to persuade and attract; such clear, merry, careless
eyes they had been, that they invariably brought over to his
side any person he wished to gain. Now, when he was
nearly forty years old, their ancient, kind, frank expression
had died out of them, and a certain cynicism&mdash;a cunning&mdash;an
irony very often, and yet another variety of expression,
of late&mdash;an expression of melancholy or pain, undefined but
keen, had taken the place of the earlier attractive qualities
of his eyes. This expression of melancholy especially
showed itself when he was alone; and it was a strange fact
that the gay, careless, happy fellow of a couple of years ago,
the man who could tell a funny story so inimitably, should
now love nothing so well as to be all alone. He intended
to throw up most of his friends&mdash;a quite unnecessary step,
in spite of his present financial difficulties. Probably his
vanity was to blame for this intention: he could not bear
to see his old friends in his present position; with his
vain suspicious character it would be most unpalatable to
him.
</p>

<p>
But his vanity began to change its nature in solitude. It
did not grow less, on the contrary; but it seemed to develop
into a special type of vanity which was unlike its old
self. This new vanity suffered from entirely different
causes, <q><emph>higher</emph> causes, if I may so express it,</q> he said,
<q>and if there really be higher and lower motives in this
world.</q>
</p>

<p>
He defined these <q>higher things</q> as matters which he
could not laugh at, or turn to ridicule when happening in
his own individual experience. Of course it would be quite
another thing with the same subjects in society; by <emph>himself</emph>
he could not ridicule then; but put him among other people,
and he would be the first to tear himself from all of those
secret resolutions of his conscience made in solitude, and
laugh them to scorn.
</p>

<p>
Very often, on rising from his bed in the morning, he
would feel ashamed of the thoughts and feelings which had
animated him during the long sleepless night&mdash;and his
nights of late had been sleepless. He seemed suspicious of
everything and everybody, great and small, and grew mistrustful
of himself.
</p>

<p>
One fact stood out clearly, and that was that during
those sleepless nights his thoughts and opinions took
huge leaps and bounds, sometimes changing entirely from
the thoughts and opinions of the daytime. This fact
struck him very forcibly; and he took occasion to consult
an eminent medical friend. He spoke in fun, but the
doctor informed him that the fact of feelings and opinions
changing during meditations at night, and during sleeplessness,
was one long recognised by science; and that that was
especially the case with persons of strong thinking power,
and of acute feelings. He stated further that very often
the beliefs of a whole life are uprooted under the melancholy
influence of night and inability to sleep, and that
often the most fateful resolutions are made under the same
influence; that sometimes this impressionability to the
mystic influence of the dark hours amounted to a malady,
in which case measures must be taken, the radical manner
of living should be changed, diet considered, a journey
undertaken if possible, etc., etc.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff listened no further, but he was sure that in
his own case there was decided malady.
</p>

<p>
Very soon his morning meditations began to partake of
the nature of those of the night, but they were more bitter.
Certain events of his life now began to recur to his memory
more and more vividly; they would strike him suddenly,
and without apparent reason: things which had been forgotten
for ten or fifteen years&mdash;some so long ago that he
thought it miraculous that he should have been able to recall
them at all. But that was not all&mdash;for, after all, what
man who has seen any life has not hundreds of such recollections
of the past? The principal point was that all this
past came back to him now with an absolutely new light
thrown upon it, and he seemed to look at it from an entirely
new and unexpected point of view. Why did some of his
acts appear to him now to be nothing better than crimes?
It was not merely in the judgment of his intellect that
these things appeared so to him now&mdash;had it been only his
poor sick mind, he would not have trusted it; but his
whole being seemed to condemn him; he would curse and
even weep over these recollections of the past! If anyone
had told him a couple of years since that he would <emph>weep</emph>
over anything, he would have laughed the idea to scorn.
</p>

<p>
At first he recalled the unpleasant experiences of his life:
certain failures in society, humiliations; he remembered how
some designing person had so successfully blackened his
character that he was requested to cease his visits to a certain
house; how once, and not so very long ago, he had been
publicly insulted, and had not challenged the offender;
how once an epigram had been fastened to his name by
some witty person, in the midst of a party of pretty women
and he had not found a reply; he remembered several unpaid
debts, and how he had most stupidly run through two
very respectable fortunes.
</p>

<p>
Then he began to recall facts belonging to a <q>higher</q>
order. He remembered that he had once insulted a poor
old grey-headed clerk, and that the latter had covered his
face with his hands and cried, which Velchaninoff had thought
a great joke at the time, but now looked upon in quite another
light. Then he thought how he had once, merely for fun, set
a scandal going about the beautiful little wife of a certain
schoolmaster, and how the husband had got to hear the
rumour. He (Velchaninoff) had left the town shortly after
and did not know how the matter had ended; but now he
fell to wondering and picturing to himself the possible consequences
of his action; and goodness knows where this
theme would not have taken him to if he had not suddenly
recalled another picture: that of a poor girl, whom he had
been ashamed of and never thought of loving, but whom he
had betrayed and forsaken, her and her child, when he left
St. Petersburg. He had afterwards searched for this girl and
her baby for a whole year, but never found them.
</p>

<p>
Of this sort of recollections there were, alas! but too many;
and each one seemed to bring along with it a train of others.
His vanity began to suffer, little by little, under these
memories. I have said that his vanity had developed into a
new type of vanity. There were moments (few albeit) in
which he was not even ashamed of having no carriage of his
own, now; or of being seen by one of his former friends in
shabby clothes; or when, if seen and looked at by such a
person contemptuously, he was high-minded enough to
suppress even a frown. Of course such moments of self-oblivion
were rare; but, as I said before, his vanity
began little by little to change away from its former quarters
and to centre upon one question which was perpetually
ranging itself before his intellect. <q>There is some power
or other,</q> he would muse, sarcastically, <q>somewhere, which
is extremely interested in my morals, and sends me these
damnable recollections and tears of remorse! Let them
come, by all means; but they have not the slightest effect
on me! for I haven't a scrap of independence about me, in
spite of my wretched forty years, I know that for certain.
Why, if it were to happen so that I should gain anything by
spreading another scandal about that schoolmaster's wife,
(for instance, that she had accepted presents from me, or
something of that sort), I should certainly spread it without
a thought.</q>
</p>

<p>
But though no other opportunity ever did occur of
maligning the schoolmistress, yet the very thought alone
that <emph>if</emph> such an opportunity were to occur he would inevitably
seize it was almost fatal to him at times. He was not
tortured with memory at every moment of his life; he had
intervals of time to breathe and rest in. But the longer he
stayed, the more unpleasant did he find his life in St. Petersburg.
July came in. At certain moments he felt inclined to
throw up his lawsuit and all, and go down to the Crimea; but
after an hour or so he would despise his own idea, and
laugh at himself for entertaining it.
</p>

<p>
<q>These thoughts won't be driven away by a mere journey
down south,</q> he said to himself, <q>when they have once
begun to annoy me; besides, if I am easy in my conscience
now, I surely need not try to run away from any such
worrying recollections of past days!</q> <q>Why should I go
after all?</q> he resumed, in a strain of melancholy philosophizing;
<q>this place is a very heaven for a hypochondriac like
myself, what with the dust and the heat, and the discomfort
of this house, what with the nonsensical swagger and pretence
of all these wretched little <q>civil servants</q> in the
departments I frequent! Everyone is delightfully candid&mdash;and
candour is undoubtedly worthy of all respect! I <emph>won't</emph>
go away&mdash;I'll stay and die here rather than go!</q>
</p>



</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER II.</head>

<p>
It was the third of July. The heat and closeness of the air
had become quite unbearable. The day had been a busy
one for Velchaninoff&mdash;he had been walking and driving
about without rest, and had still in prospect a visit in the
evening to a certain state councillor who lived somewhere
on the Chornaya Ri&eacute;chka (black stream), and whom he was
anxious to drop in upon unexpectedly.
</p>

<p>
At six o'clock our hero issued from his house once more,
and trudged off to dine at a restaurant on the Nefsky, near
the police-bridge&mdash;a second-rate sort of place, but French.
Here he took his usual corner, and ordered his usual
dinner, and waited.
</p>

<p>
He always had a rouble<note place="foot"><p>
The present value of a rouble is about two shillings.
</p></note> dinner, and paid for his wine
extra, which moderation he looked upon as a discreet
sacrifice to the temporary financial embarrassment under
which he was suffering.
</p>

<p>
He regularly went through the ceremony of wondering
how he could bring himself to eat <q>such nastiness,</q> and yet
as regularly he demolished every morsel, and with excellent
show of appetite too, just as though he had eaten nothing
for three days.
</p>

<p>
<q>This appetite can't be healthy!</q> he murmured to himself
sometimes, observing his own voracity. However, on this
particular occasion, he sat down to his dinner in a miserably
bad humour: he threw his hat angrily away somewhere,
tipped his chair back,&mdash;and reflected.
</p>

<p>
He was in the sort of humour that if his next neighbour&mdash;dining
at the little table near him&mdash;were to rattle his plate,
or if the boy serving him were to make any little blunder,
or, in fact, if any little petty annoyance were to put him out
of a sudden, he was quite capable of shouting at the
offender, and, in fact, of kicking up a serious row on the
smallest pretext.
</p>

<p>
Soup was served to him. He took up his spoon, and
was about to commence operations, when he suddenly
threw it down again, and started from his seat. An unexpected
thought had struck him, and in an instant he had
realized why he had been plunged in gloom and mental
perturbation during the last few days. Goodness knows
why he thus suddenly became inspired, as it were, with the
truth; but so it was. He jumped from his chair, and in an
instant it all stood out before him as plain as his five fingers!
<q>It's all that hat!</q> he muttered to himself; <q>it's all simply
and solely that damnable round hat, with the crape band
round it; that's the reason and cause of all my worries
these last days!</q>
</p>

<p>
He began to think; and the more he thought, the more
dejected he became, and the more astonishing appeared the
<q>remarkable circumstance of the hat.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But, hang it all, there <emph>is</emph> no circumstance!</q> he growled
to himself. <q>What circumstance do I mean? There's been
nothing in the nature of an event or occurrence!</q>
</p>

<p>
The fact of the matter was this: Nearly a fortnight since,
he had met for the first time, somewhere about the corner
of the Podiacheskaya, a gentleman with crape round his hat.
There was nothing particular about the man&mdash;he was just
like all others; but as he passed Velchaninoff he had stared
at him so fixedly that it was impossible to avoid noticing
him, and more than noticing&mdash;observing him attentively.
</p>

<p>
The man's face seemed to be familiar to Velchaninoff.
He had evidently seen him somewhere and at some time or
other.
</p>

<p>
<q>But one sees thousands of people during one's life,</q>
thought Velchaninoff; <q>one can't remember every face!</q>
So he had gone on his way, and before he was twenty yards
further, to all appearances he had forgotten all about the
meeting, in spite of the strength of the first impression made
upon him.
</p>

<p>
And yet he had <emph>not</emph> forgotten; for the impression
remained all day, and a very original impression it was, too,&mdash;a
kind of objectless feeling of anger against he knew not
what. He remembered his exact feelings at this moment,
a fortnight after the occurrence: how he had been puzzled
by the angry nature of his sentiments at the time, and
puzzled to such an extent that he had never for a moment
connected his ill-humour with the meeting of the morning,
though he had felt as cross as possible all day. But the
gentleman with the crape band had not lost much time
about reminding Velchaninoff of his existence, for the very
next day he met the latter again, on the Nefsky Prospect
and again he had stared in a peculiarly fixed way at him.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff flared up and spat on the ground in irritation&mdash;Russian
like, but a moment after he was wondering at his
own wrath. <q>There are faces, undoubtedly,</q> he reflected,
<q rend='pre'>which fill one with disgust at first sight; but I certainly
<emph>have</emph> met that fellow somewhere or other.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, I <emph>have</emph> met him before!</q> he muttered again, half
an hour later.
</p>

<p>
And again, as on the last occasion, he was in a vile
humour all that evening, and even went so far as to have a
bad dream in the night; and yet it never entered his head
to imagine that the cause of his bad temper on both occasions
had been the accidental meeting with the gentleman
in mourning, although on the second evening he had
remembered and thought of the chance encounter two or
three times.
</p>

<p>
He had even flared up angrily to think that <q>such a dirty-looking
cad</q> should presume to linger in his memory so
long; he would have felt it humiliating to himself to imagine
for a moment that such a wretched creature could possibly
be in any way connected with the agitated condition of his
feelings.
</p>

<p>
Two days later the pair had met once more at the landing
place of one of the small Neva ferry steamers.
</p>

<p>
On the third occasion Velchaninoff was ready to swear
that the man recognised him, and had pressed through the
crowd towards him; had even dared to stretch out his hand
and call him by name. As to this last fact he was not quite
certain, however. <q>At all events, who the deuce <emph>is</emph> he?</q>
thought Velchaninoff, <q>and why can't the idiot come up
and speak to me if he really does recognise me; and if he
so much wishes to do so?</q> With these thoughts Velchaninoff
had taken a droshky and started off for the Smolney
Monastery, where his lawyer lived.
</p>

<p>
Half an hour later he was engaged in his usual quarrel
with that gentleman.
</p>

<p>
But that same evening he was in a worse humour than
ever, and his night was spent in fantastic dreams and
imaginings, which were anything but pleasant. <q>I suppose
it's bile!</q> he concluded, as he paid his matutinal visit to
the looking-glass.
</p>

<p>
This was the third meeting.
</p>

<p>
Then, for five days there was not a sign of the man; and
yet, much to his distaste, Velchaninoff could not, for the life
of him, avoid thinking of the man with the crape band.
</p>

<p>
He caught himself musing over the fellow. <q>What have
I to do with him?</q> he thought. <q>What can his business
in St. Petersburg be?&mdash;he looks busy: and whom is he in
mourning for? He clearly recognises me, but I don't know
in the least who he is! And why do such people as he is
put crape on their hats? it doesn't seem 'the thing' for
them, somehow! I believe I shall recognise this fellow if
I ever get a good close look at him!</q>
</p>

<p>
And there came over him that sensation we all know so
well&mdash;the same feeling that one has when one can't for the
life of one think of the required word; every other word
comes up; associations with the right word come up; occasions
when one has used the word come up; one wanders
round and round the immediate vicinity of the word wanted,
but the actual word itself will not appear, though you may
break your head to get at it!
</p>

<p>
<q>Let's see, now: it was&mdash;yes&mdash;some while since. It was&mdash;where
on earth was it? There was a&mdash;oh! devil take
whatever there was or wasn't there! What does it matter
to me?</q> he broke off angrily of a sudden. <q>I'm not going
to lower myself by thinking of a little cad like that!</q>
</p>

<p>
He felt very angry; but when, in the evening, he remembered
that he had been so upset, and recollected the cause
of his anger, he felt the disagreeable sensation of having
been caught by someone doing something wrong.
</p>

<p>
This fact puzzled and annoyed him.
</p>

<p>
<q>There must be some reason for my getting so angry at
the mere recollection of that man's face,</q> he thought, but he
didn't finish thinking it out.
</p>

<p>
But the next evening he was still more indignant; and
this time, he really thought, with good cause. <q>Such audacity
is unparalleled!</q> he said to himself.
</p>

<p>
The fact of the matter is, there had been a fourth meeting
with the man of the crape hat band. The latter had
apparently arisen from the earth and confronted him. But
let me explain what had happened.
</p>

<p>
It so chanced that Velchaninoff had just met, accidentally,
that very state-councillor mentioned a few pages back, whom
he had been so anxious to see, and on whom he had intended
to pounce unexpectedly at his country house. This
gentleman evidently avoided Velchaninoff, but at the same
time was most necessary to the latter in his lawsuit. Consequently,
when Velchaninoff met him, the one was delighted,
while the other was very much the reverse. Velchaninoff had
immediately button-holed him, and walked down the street
with him, talking; doing his very utmost to keep the sly old
fox to the subject on which it was so necessary that he
should be pumped. And it was just at this most important
moment, when Velchaninoff's intellect was all on the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>qui
vive</foreign> to catch up the slightest hints of what he wished to get
at, while the foxy old councillor (aware of the fact) was
doing his best to reveal nothing, that the former, taking his
eyes from his companion's face for one instant, beheld the
gentleman of the crape hatband walking along the other
side of the road, and looking at him&mdash;nay, <emph>watching</emph> him,
evidently&mdash;and apparently smiling!
</p>

<p>
<q>Devil take him!</q> said Velchaninoff, bursting out into
fury at once, while the <q>old fox</q> instantly disappeared,
<q>and I should have succeeded in another minute. Curse
that dirty little hound! he's simply spying me. I'll&mdash;I'll hire
somebody to&mdash;I'll take my oath he laughed at me! D&mdash;n
him, I'll thrash him. I wish I had a stick with me. I'll&mdash;I'll
buy one! I won't leave this matter so. Who the deuce
is he? I <emph>will</emph> know! Who is he?</q>
</p>

<p>
At last, three days after this fourth encounter, we find
Velchaninoff sitting down to dinner at his restaurant, as recorded
a page or two back, in a state of mind bordering
upon the furious. He could not conceal the state of his
feelings from himself, in spite of all his pride. He was
obliged to confess at last, that all his anxiety, his irritation,
his state of agitation generally, must undoubtedly be connected
with, and absolutely attributed to, the appearance of
the wretched-looking creature with the crape hatband, in
spite of his insignificance.
</p>

<p>
<q>I may be a hypochondriac,</q> he reflected, <q>and I may
be inclined to make an elephant out of a gnat; but how
does it help me? What use is it to me if I persuade
myself to believe that <emph>perhaps</emph> all this is fancy? Why, if every
dirty little wretch like that is to have the power of upsetting
a man like myself, why&mdash;it's&mdash;it's simply unbearable!</q>
</p>

<p>
Undoubtedly, at this last (fifth) encounter of to-day, the
elephant had proved himself a very small gnat indeed.
The <q>crape man</q> had appeared suddenly, as usual, and had
passed by Velchaninoff, but without looking up at him this
time; indeed, he had gone by with downcast eyes, and had
even seemed anxious to pass unobserved. Velchaninoff had
turned rapidly round and shouted as loud as ever he could
at him.
</p>

<p>
<q>Hey!</q> he cried. <q>You! Crape hatband! You want
to escape notice this time, do you? Who are you?</q>
</p>

<p>
Both the question and the whole idea of calling after the
man were absurdly foolish, and Velchaninoff knew it the
moment he had said the words. The man had turned
round, stopped for an instant, lost his head, smiled&mdash;half
made up his mind to say something,&mdash;had waited half a
minute in painful indecision, then twisted suddenly round
again, and <q>bolted</q> without a word. Velchaninoff gazed
after him in amazement. <q>What if it be <emph>I</emph> that haunt <emph>him</emph>,
and not he me, after all?</q> he thought. However,
Velchaninoff ate up his dinner, and then drove off to pounce
upon the town councillor at the latter's house, if he could.
</p>

<p>
The councillor was not in; and he was informed that he
would scarcely be at home before three or four in the
morning, because he had gone to a <q>name's-day party.</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff felt that this was too bad! In his rage he
determined to follow and hunt the fellow up at the party: he
actually took a droshky, and started off with that wild idea;
but luckily he thought better of it on the way, got out of
the vehicle and walked away towards the <q>Great Theatre,</q>
near which he lived. He felt that he must have motion;
also he <emph>must</emph> absolutely sleep well this coming night: in
order to sleep he must be tired; so he walked all the way
home&mdash;a fairly long walk, and arrived there about half-past
ten, as tired as he could wish.
</p>

<p>
His lodging, which he had taken last March, and had
abused ever since, apologising to himself for living <q>in such
a hole,</q> and at the same time excusing himself for the
fact by the reflection that it was only for a while, and that
he had dropped quite accidentally into St. Petersburg&mdash;thanks
to that cursed lawsuit!&mdash;his lodging, I say, was by no means
so bad as he made it out to be!
</p>

<p>
The entrance certainly was a little dark, and dirty-looking,
being just under the arch of the gateway. But he had two
fine large light rooms on the second floor, separated by the
entrance hall: one of these rooms overlooked the yard and
the other the street. Leading out of the former of these
was a smaller room, meant to be used as a bedroom; but
Velchaninoff had filled it with a disordered array of books
and papers, and preferred to sleep in one of the large rooms,
the one overlooking the street, to wit.
</p>

<p>
His bed was made for him, every day, upon the large
divan. The rooms were full of good furniture, and some
valuable ornaments and pictures were scattered about, but
the whole place was in dreadful disorder; the fact being
that at this time Velchaninoff was without a regular servant.
His one domestic had gone away to stay with her friends
in the country; he thought of taking a man, but decided
that it was not worth while for a short time; besides he
hated flunkeys, and ended by making arrangements with
his dvornik's sister Martha, who was to come up every
morning and <q>do out</q> his rooms, he leaving the key with
her as he went out each day. Martha did absolutely nothing
towards tidying the place and robbed him besides, but he
didn't care, he liked to be alone in the house. But solitude
is all very well within certain limits, and Velchaninoff found
that his nerves could not stand all this sort of thing at
certain bilious moments; and it so fell out that he began
to loathe his room more and more every time he entered it.
</p>

<p>
However, on this particular evening he hardly gave himself
time to undress; he threw himself on his bed, and
determined that nothing should make him think of <emph>anything</emph>,
and that he would fall asleep at once.
</p>

<p>
And, strangely enough, his head had hardly touched the
pillow before he actually was asleep; and this was the first
time for a month past that such a thing had occurred.
</p>

<p>
He awoke at about two, considerably agitated; he had
dreamed certain very strange dreams, reminding him of the
incoherent wanderings of fever.
</p>

<p>
The subject seemed to be some crime which he had committed
and concealed, but of which he was accused by a
continuous flow of people who swarmed into his rooms for
the purpose. The crowd which had already collected within
was enormous, and yet they continued to pour in in such
numbers that the door was never shut for an instant.
</p>

<p>
But his whole interest seemed to centre in one strange
looking individual,&mdash;a man who seemed to have once been
very closely and intimately connected with him, but who had
died long ago and now reappeared for some reason or other.
</p>

<p>
The most tormenting part of the matter was that
Velchaninoff could not recollect who this man was,&mdash;he
could not remember his name,&mdash;though he recollected
the fact that he had once dearly loved him. All the rest of
the people swarming into the room seemed to be waiting
for the final word of this man,&mdash;either the condemnation or
the justification of Velchaninoff was to be pronounced by
him,&mdash;and everyone was impatiently waiting to hear him
speak.
</p>

<p>
But he sat motionless at the table, and would not open
his lips to say a word of any sort.
</p>

<p>
The uproar continued, the general annoyance increased,
and, suddenly, Velchaninoff himself strode up to the man in
a fury, and smote him because he would not speak.
Velchaninoff felt the strangest satisfaction in having thus
smitten him; his heart seemed to freeze in horror for what
he had done, and in acute suffering for the crime involved
in his action,&mdash;but in that very sensation of freezing at the
heart lay the sense of satisfaction which he felt.
</p>

<p>
Exasperated more and more, he struck the man a second
and a third time; and then&mdash;in a sort of intoxication of fury
and terror, which amounted to actual insanity, and yet bore
within it a germ of delightful satisfaction, he ceased to
count his blows, and rained them in without ceasing.
</p>

<p>
He felt he must destroy, annihilate, demolish all this.
</p>

<p>
Suddenly something strange happened; everyone present
had given a dreadful cry and turned expectantly towards
the door, while at the same moment there came three
terrific peals of the hall-bell, so violent that it appeared
someone was anxious to pull the bell-handle out.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff awoke, started up in a second, and made for
the door; he was persuaded that the ring at the bell had
been no dream or illusion, but that someone had actually
rung, and was at that moment standing at the front
door.
</p>

<p>
<q>It would be <emph>too</emph> unnatural if such a clear and unmistakable
ring should turn out to be nothing but an item of a
dream!</q> he thought. But, to his surprise, it proved that
such was nevertheless the actual state of the case! He
opened the door and went out on to the landing; he looked
downstairs and about him, but there was not a soul to be
seen. The bell hung motionless. Surprised, but pleased,
he returned into his room. He lit a candle, and suddenly
remembered that he had left the door closed, but not locked
and chained. He had often returned home before this
evening and forgotten to lock the door behind him, without
attaching any special significance to the fact; his maid had
often respectfully protested against such neglect while with
him. He now returned to the entrance hall to make the
door fast; before doing so he opened it, however, and had
one more look about the stairs. He then shut the door and
fastened the chain and hook, but did not take the trouble
to turn the key in the lock.
</p>

<p>
Some clock struck half-past two at this moment, so that
he had had three hours' sleep&mdash;more or less.
</p>

<p>
His dream had agitated him to such an extent that he
felt unwilling to lie down again at once; he decided to walk
up and down the room two or three times first, just long
enough to smoke a cigar. Having half-dressed himself, he
went to the window, drew the heavy curtains aside and
pulled up one of the blinds, it was almost full daylight.
These light summer nights of St. Petersburg always had a
bad effect upon his nerves, and of late they had added to
the causes of his sleeplessness, so that a few weeks since he
had invested in these thick curtains, which completely shut
out the light when drawn close.
</p>

<p>
Having thus let in the sunshine, quite oblivious of the
lighted candle on the table, he commenced to walk up and
down the room. Still feeling the burden of his dream upon
him, its impression was even now at work upon his mind, he
still felt a painfully guilty sensation about him, caused by
the fact that he had allowed himself to raise his hand against
<q>that man</q> and strike him. <q>But, my dear sir!</q> he argued
with himself, <q>it was not a man at all! the whole thing was
a dream! what's the use of worrying yourself for nothing?</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff now became obstinately convinced that he
was a sick man, and that to his sickly state of body was to be
attributed all his perturbation of mind. He was an invalid.
</p>

<p>
It had always been a weak point with Velchaninoff that he
hated to think of himself as growing old or infirm; and yet
in his moments of anger he loved to exaggerate one or the
other in order to worry himself.
</p>

<p>
<q>It's old age,</q> he now muttered to himself, as he paced
up and down the room. <q>I'm becoming an old fogey&mdash;that's
the fact of the matter! I'm losing my memory&mdash;see
ghosts, and have dreams, and hear bells ring&mdash;curse it all!
I know these dreams of old, they always herald fever with
me. I dare swear that the whole business of this man with
the crape hatband has been a dream too! I was perfectly
right yesterday, he isn't haunting me the least bit in the
world; it is I that am haunting <emph>him</emph>! I've invented a
pretty little ghost-story about him and then climb under the
table in terror at my own creation! Why do I call him a
little cad, too? he may be a most respectable individual for
all I know! His face is a disagreeable one, certainly,
though there is nothing hideous about it! He dresses just
like anyone else. I don't know&mdash;there's something about
his look&mdash;There I go again! What the devil have
I got to do with his look? what a fool I am&mdash;just as
though I could not live without the dirty little wretch&mdash;curse
him!</q>
</p>

<p>
Among other thoughts connected with this haunting crape-man
was one which puzzled Velchaninoff immensely; he
felt convinced that at some time or other he had known the
man, and known him very intimately; and that now the
latter, when meeting him, always laughed at him because he
was aware of some great secret of his former life, or because
he was amused to see Velchaninoff's present humiliating condition
of poverty.
</p>

<p>
Mechanically our hero approached the window in order
to get a breath of fresh air&mdash;when he was suddenly seized
with a violent fit of shuddering;&mdash;a feeling came over him
that something unusual and unheard-of was happening
before his very eyes.
</p>

<p>
He had not had time to open the window when something
he saw caused him to slip behind the corner of the
curtain, and hide himself.
</p>

<p>
The man in the crape hatband was standing on the
opposite side of the street.
</p>

<p>
He was standing with his face turned directly towards
Velchaninoff's window, but evidently unaware of the latter's
presence there, and was carefully examining the house, and
apparently considering some question connected with it.
</p>

<p>
He seemed to come to a decision after a moment's
thought, and raised his finger to his forehead; then he
looked quietly about him, and ran swiftly across the road
on tiptoe. He reached the gate, and entered it; this gate
was often left open on summer nights until two or three in
the morning.
</p>

<p>
<q>He's coming to me,</q> muttered Velchaninoff, and with
equal caution he left the window, and ran to the front door;
arrived in the hall, he stood in breathless expectation before
the door, and placed his trembling hand carefully upon the
hook which he had fastened a few minutes since, and stood
listening for the tread of the expected footfall on the stairs.
His heart was beating so loud that he was afraid he might
miss the sound of the cautious steps approaching.
</p>

<p>
He could understand nothing of what was happening, but
it seemed clear that his dream was about to be realised.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff was naturally brave. He loved risk for its
own sake, and very often ran into useless dangers, with no
one by to see, to please himself. But this was different,
somehow; he was not himself, and yet he was as brave
as ever, but with something added. He made out every
movement of the stranger from behind his own door.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah!&mdash;there he comes!&mdash;he's on the steps now!&mdash;here
he comes!&mdash;he's up now!&mdash;now he's looking down stairs
and all about, and crouching down! Aha! there's his hand
on the door-handle&mdash;he's trying it!&mdash;he thought he would
find it unlocked!&mdash;then he must know that I <emph>do</emph> leave it
unlocked sometimes!&mdash;He's trying it again!&mdash;I suppose he
thinks the hook may slip!&mdash;he doesn't care to go away
without doing anything!</q>
</p>

<p>
So ran Velchaninoff's thoughts, and so indeed followed the
man's actions. There was no doubt about it, someone was
certainly standing outside and trying the door-handle, carefully
and cautiously pulling at the door itself, and, in fact,
endeavouring to effect an entrance; equally sure was it that
the person so doing must have his own object in trying to
sneak into another man's house at dead of night. But
Velchaninoff's plan of action was laid, and he awaited the
proper moment; he was anxious to seize a good opportunity&mdash;slip
the hook and chain&mdash;open the door wide,
suddenly, and stand face to face with this bugbear, and then
ask him what the deuce he wanted there.
</p>

<p>
No sooner devised than executed.
</p>

<p>
Awaiting the proper moment, Velchaninoff suddenly
slipped the hook, pushed the door wide, and almost
tumbled over the man with the crape hatband!
</p>



</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER III.</head>

<p>
The crape-man stood rooted to the spot dumb with
astonishment.
</p>

<p>
Both men stood opposite one another on the landing,
and both stared in each other's eyes, silent and motionless.
</p>

<p>
So passed a few moments, and suddenly, like a flash of
lightning, Velchaninoff became aware of the identity of his
guest.
</p>

<p>
At the same moment the latter seemed to guess that
Velchaninoff had recognised him. Velchaninoff could see it
in his eyes. In one instant the visitor's whole face was all
ablaze with its very sweetest of smiles.
</p>

<p>
<q>Surely I have the pleasure of speaking to Aleksey
Ivanovitch?</q> he asked, in the most dulcet of voices,
comically inappropriate to the circumstances of the case.
</p>

<p>
<q>Surely you are Pavel Pavlovitch Trusotsky?</q> asked
Velchaninoff, in return, after a pause, and with an expression
of much perplexity.
</p>

<p>
<q>I had the pleasure of your acquaintance ten years ago
at T&mdash;&mdash;, and, if I may remind you of the fact, we were
almost intimate friends.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite so&mdash;oh yes! but it is now three o'clock in the
morning, and you have been trying my lock for the last ten
minutes.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Three o'clock!</q> cried the visitor, looking at his watch
with an air of melancholy surprise.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, so it is! dear me&mdash;three o'clock! forgive me,
Aleksey Ivanovitch! I ought to have found it out before
thinking of paying you a visit. I will do myself the honour
of calling to explain another day, and now I&mdash;.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh no;&mdash;no, no! If you are to explain at all let's
have it at once; this moment!</q> interrupted Velchaninoff
warmly. <q>Kindly step in here, into the room! You must
have meant to come in, you know; you didn't come here
at night, like this, simply for the pleasure of trying my lock?</q>
</p>

<p>
He felt excited, and at the same time was conscious of a
sort of timidity; he could not collect his thoughts. He
was ashamed of himself for it. There was no danger, no
mystery about the business, nothing but the silly figure of
Pavel Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
And yet he could not feel satisfied that there was nothing
particular in it; he felt afraid of something to come, he
knew not what or when.
</p>

<p>
However, he made the man enter, seated him in a chair,
and himself sat down on the side of his bed, a yard or so
off, and rested his elbows on his knees while he quietly
waited for the other to begin. He felt irritated; he stared
at his visitor and let his thoughts run. Strangely enough,
the other never opened his mouth; he seemed to be entirely
oblivious of the fact that it was his duty to speak. Nay, he
was even looking enquiringly at Velchaninoff as though quite
expecting that the latter would speak to <emph>him</emph>!
</p>

<p>
Perhaps he felt a little uncomfortable at first, somewhat
as a mouse must feel when he finds himself unexpectedly
in the trap.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff very soon lost his patience.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well?</q> he cried, <q>you are not a fantasy or a dream
or anything of that kind, are you? You aren't a corpse,
are you? Come, my friend, this is not a game or play. I
want your explanation, please!</q>
</p>

<p>
The visitor fidgeted about a little, smiled, and began to
speak cautiously.
</p>

<p>
<q>So far as I can see,</q> he said, <q>the time of night of my
visit is what surprises you, and that I should have come as
I did; in fact, when I remember the past, and our intimacy,
and all that, I am astonished myself; but the fact is, I did
not mean to come in at all, and if I did so it was purely an
accident.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>An accident! Why, I saw you creeping across the road
on tip-toes!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You saw me? Indeed! Come, then you know as
much or more about the matter than I do; but I see I am
annoying you. This is how it was: I've been in town three
weeks or so on business. I am Pavel Pavlovitch Trusotsky,
you recognized me yourself, my business in town is to effect an
exchange of departments. I am trying for a situation in
another place&mdash;one with a large increase of salary; but all
this is beside the point; the fact of the matter is, I believe
I have been delaying my business on purpose. I believe if
everything were settled at this moment I should still be
dawdling in this St. Petersburg of yours in my present condition
of mind. I go wandering about as though I had lost
all interest in things, and were rather glad of the fact, in
my present condition of mind.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What condition of mind?</q> asked Velchaninoff, frowning.
</p>

<p>
The visitor raised his eyes to Velchaninoff's, lifted his hat
from the ground beside him, and with great dignity pointed
out the black crape band.
</p>

<p>
<q>There, sir, in <emph>that</emph> condition of mind!</q> he observed.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff stared stupidly at the crape, and thence at
the man's face. Suddenly his face flushed up in a hot
blush for a moment, and he was violently agitated.
</p>

<p>
<q>Not Natalia Vasilievna, surely?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, Natalia Vasilievna! Last March! Consumption,
sir, and almost suddenly&mdash;all over in two or three months&mdash;and
here am I left as you see me!</q>
</p>

<p>
So saying, Pavel Pavlovitch, with much show of feeling,
bent his bald head down and kept it bent for some ten
seconds, while he held out his two hands, in one of which
was the hat with the band, in explanatory emotion.
</p>

<p>
This gesture, and the man's whole air, seemed to brighten
Velchaninoff up; he smiled sarcastically for one instant, not
more at present, for the news of this lady's death (he had
known her so long ago, and had forgotten her many a year
since) had made a quite unexpected impression upon his
mind.
</p>

<p>
<q>Is it possible!</q> he muttered, using the first words that
came to his lips, <q>and pray why did you not come here
and tell me at once?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Thanks for your kind interest, I see and value it, in
spite of&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In spite of what?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In spite of so many years of separation you at once
sympathised with my sorrow&mdash;and in fact with myself, and
so fully too&mdash;that I feel naturally grateful. That's all I had
to tell you, sir! Don't suppose I doubt my friends, you
know; why, even here, in this place, I could put my finger
on several very sincere friends indeed (for instance, Stepan
Michailovitch Bagantoff); but remember, my dear Aleksey
Ivanovitch&mdash;nine years have passed since we were acquaintances&mdash;or
friends, if you'll allow me to say so&mdash;and meanwhile
you have never been to see us, never written.</q>
</p>

<p>
The guest sang all this out as though he were reading it
from music, but kept his eyes fixed on the ground the
while, although, of course, he saw what was going on above
his eyelashes exceedingly well all the same.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff had found his head by this time.
</p>

<p>
With a strange sort of fascinated attention, which
strengthened itself every moment, he continued to gaze at
and listen to Pavel Pavlovitch, and of a sudden, when the
latter stopped speaking, a flood of curious ideas swept unexpectedly
through his brain.
</p>

<p>
<q>But look here,</q> he cried, <q>how is it that I never recognized
you all this while?&mdash;we've met five times, at least,
in the streets!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite so&mdash;I am perfectly aware of the circumstance. You
chanced to meet me two or three times, and&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, no! <emph>you</emph> met <emph>me</emph>, you know&mdash;not I you!</q> Velchaninoff
suddenly burst into a roar of laughter, and rose from
his seat. Pavel Pavlovitch paused a moment, looked keenly
at Velchaninoff, and then continued:
</p>

<p>
<q>As to your not recognizing me, in the first place you
might easily have forgotten me by now; and besides, I
have had small-pox since last we met, and I daresay my
face is a good deal marked.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Smallpox? why, how did you manage that?&mdash;he has
had it, though, by Jove!</q> cried Velchaninoff. <q>What a
funny fellow you are&mdash;however, go on, don't stop.</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff's spirits were rising higher and higher; he
was beginning to feel wonderfully light-hearted. That feeling
of agitation which had lately so disturbed him had given
place to quite a different sentiment. He now began to
stride up and down the room, very quickly.
</p>

<p>
<q>I was going to say,</q> resumed Pavel Pavlovitch, <q>that
though I have met you several times, and though I quite
intended to come and look you up, when I was arranging
my visit to Petersburg, still, I was in that condition of
mind, you know, and my wits have so suffered since last
March, that&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Wits since last March,&mdash;yes, go on: wait a minute&mdash;do
you smoke?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh&mdash;you know, Natalia Vasilievna, never&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite so; but since March&mdash;eh?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well&mdash;I might, a cigarette or so.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Here you are, then! Light up and go on,&mdash;go on! you
interest me wonderfully.</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff lit a cigar and sat down on his bed again.
Pavel Pavlovitch paused a moment.
</p>

<p>
<q>But what a state of agitation you seem to be in yourself!</q>
said he, <q>are you quite well?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, curse my health!</q> cried Velchaninoff,&mdash;<q>you go
on!</q>
</p>

<p>
The visitor observed his host's agitation with satisfaction;
he went on with his share of the talking with more confidence.
</p>

<p>
<q>What am I to go on about?</q> he asked. <q>Imagine me,
Alexey Ivanovitch&mdash;a broken man,&mdash;not simply broken,
but gone at the root, as it were; a man forced to change
his whole manner of living, after twenty years of married
life, wandering about the dusty roads without an object,&mdash;mind
lost&mdash;almost oblivious of his own self,&mdash;and yet, as it
were, taking some sort of intoxicated delight in his loneliness!
Isn't it natural that if I should, at such a moment of
self-forgetfulness come across a friend&mdash;even a <emph>dear</emph> friend,
I might prefer to avoid him for that moment? and isn't it
equally natural that at another moment I should long to
see and speak with some one who has been an eye-witness
of, or a partaker, so to speak, in my never-to-be-recalled
past? and to rush&mdash;not only in the day, but at night, if it
so happens,&mdash;to rush to the embrace of such a man?&mdash;yes,
even if one has to wake him up at three in the morning
to do it! I was wrong in my time, not in my estimate
of my friend, though, for at this moment I feel the
full rapture of success; my rash action has been successful:
I have found sympathy! As for the time of night, I confess
I thought it was not twelve yet! You see, one sups of
grief, and it intoxicates one,&mdash;at least, not grief, exactly, it's
more the condition of mind&mdash;the new state of things that
affects me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Dear me, how oddly you express yourself!</q> said
Velchaninoff, rising from his seat once more, and becoming
quite serious again.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oddly, do I? Perhaps.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Look here: are you joking?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Joking!</q> cried Pavel Pavlovitch, in shocked surprise;
<q><emph>joking</emph>&mdash;at the very moment when I am telling you of&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh&mdash;be quiet about that! for goodness sake.</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff started off on his journey up and down the
room again.
</p>

<p>
So matters stood for five minutes or so: the visitor
seemed inclined to rise from his chair, but Velchaninoff
bade him sit still, and Pavel Pavlovitch obediently flopped
into his seat again.
</p>

<p>
<q>How changed you are!</q> said the host at last, stopping
in front of the other chair, as though suddenly struck
with the idea; <q>fearfully changed!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Wonderful! you're quite another man!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That's hardly surprising! <emph>nine</emph> years, sir!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, no, no! years have nothing to do with it! it's not
in appearance you are so changed: it's something else!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, sir, the nine years might account for anything.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Perhaps it's only since March, eh?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ha-ha! you are playful, sir,</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch,
laughing slyly. <q>But, if I may ask it, wherein am I so
changed?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh&mdash;why, you used to be such a staid, sober, correct
Pavel Pavlovitch; such a wise Pavel Pavlovitch; and now
you're a good-for-nothing sort of Pavel Pavlovitch.</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff was in that state of irritation when the
steadiest, gravest people will sometimes say rather more
than they mean.
</p>

<p>
<q>Good-for-nothing, am I? and <emph>wise</emph> no longer, I suppose,
eh?</q> chuckled Pavel Pavlovitch, with disagreeable
satisfaction.
</p>

<p>
<q>Wise, indeed! My dear sir, I'm afraid you are not
sober,</q> replied Velchaninoff; and added to himself, <q>I am
pretty fairly insolent myself, but I can't compare with this
little cad! And what on earth is the fellow driving at?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, my dear, good, my best of Alexey Ivanovitches,</q>
said the visitor suddenly, most excitedly, and twisting about
on his chair, <q>and why <emph>should</emph> I be sober? We are not
moving in the brilliant walks of society&mdash;you and I&mdash;just
now. We are but two dear old friends come together in
the full sincerity of perfect love, to recall and talk over that
sweet mutual tie of which the dear departed formed so
treasured a link in our friendship.</q>
</p>

<p>
So saying, the sensitive gentleman became so carried
away by his feelings that he bent his head down once more,
to hide his emotion, and buried his face in his hat.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff looked on with an uncomfortable feeling of
disgust.
</p>

<p>
<q>I can't help thinking the man is simply silly,</q> he
thought; <q>and yet&mdash;no, no&mdash;his face is so red he must be
drunk. But drunk or not drunk, what does the little
wretch want with me? That's the puzzle.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you remember&mdash;oh, <emph>don't</emph> you remember&mdash;our delightful
little evenings&mdash;dancing sometimes, or sometimes
literary&mdash;at Simeon Simeonovitch's?</q> continued the visitor,
gradually removing his hat from before his face, and apparently
growing more and more enthusiastic over the memories
of the past, <q>and our little readings&mdash;you and she and myself&mdash;and
our first meeting, when you came in to ask for
information about something connected with your business
in the town, and commenced shouting angrily at me; don't
you remember&mdash;when suddenly in came Natalia Vasilievna,
and within ten minutes you were our dear friend, and so
remained for exactly a year? Just like Turgenieff's story
<q>The Provincialka!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff had continued his walk up and down the
room during this <emph>tirade</emph>, with his eyes on the ground, listening
impatiently and with disgust&mdash;but listening <emph>hard</emph>, all
the same.
</p>

<p>
<q>It never struck me to think of 'The Provincialka' in
connection with the matter,</q> he interrupted. <q>And look
here, why do you talk in that sneaking, whining sort of
voice? You never used to do that. Your whole manner
is unlike yourself.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite so, quite so. I used to be more silent, I know.
I used to love to listen while others talked. You remember
how well the dear departed talked&mdash;the wit and grace of
her conversation. As to The Provincialka, I remember she
and I used often to compare your friendship for us to
certain episodes in that piece, and especially to the
doings of one Stupendief. It really was remarkably like
that character and his doings.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What Stupendief do you mean, confound it all?</q> cried
Velchaninoff, stamping his foot with rage. The name
seemed to have evoked certain most irritating thoughts in
his mind.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, Stupendief, don't you know, the <q>husband</q> in
<q>Provincialka,</q></q> whined Pavel Pavlovitch, in the very
sweetest of tones; <q>but that belongs to another set of fond
memories&mdash;after you departed, in fact, when Mr. Bagantoff
had honoured us with his friendship, just as you had done
before him, only that his lasted five whole years.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Bagantoff? What Bagantoff? Do you mean that
same Bagantoff who was serving down in your town? Why,
he also&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, yes! quite so. He also, he also!</q> cried the enthusiastic
Pavel Pavlovitch, seizing upon Velchaninoff's
accidental slip. <q>Of course! So that there you are&mdash;there's
the whole company. Bagantoff played the <q>count,</q> the
dear departed was the <q>Provincialka,</q> and I was the <q>husband,</q>
only that the part was taken away from me, for
incapacity, I suppose!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes; fancy <emph>you</emph> a Stupendief. You're a&mdash;you're first a
Pavel Pavlovitch Trusotsky!</q> said Velchaninoff, contemptuously,
and very unceremoniously. <q>But look here!
Bagantoff is in town; I know he is, for I have seen him.
Why don't you go to see <emph>him</emph> as well as myself?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>My dear sir, I've been there every day for the last three
weeks. He won't receive me; he's ill, and can't receive!
And, do you know, I have found out that he really is very
ill! Fancy my feelings&mdash;a five-year's friend! Oh, my dear
Alexey Ivanovitch! you don't know what my feelings are in
my present condition of mind. I assure you, at one moment
I long for the earth to open and swallow me up, and the
next I feel that I <emph>must</emph> find one of those old friends, eyewitnesses
of the past, as it were, if only to weep on his
bosom, only to weep, sir&mdash;give you my word.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, that's about enough for to-night; don't you think
so?</q> said Velchaninoff, cuttingly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, too&mdash;too much!</q> cried the other, rising. <q>It must
be four o'clock; and here am I agitating your feelings in the
most selfish way.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Now, look here; I shall call upon you myself, and
I hope that you will then&mdash;&mdash;but, tell me honestly, are you
drunk to-night?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Drunk! not the least in the world!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Did you drink nothing before you came here, or
earlier?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you know, my dear Alexey Ivanovitch, you are
quite in a high fever!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Good-night. I shall call to-morrow.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And I have noticed it all the evening, really quite delirious!</q>
continued Pavel Pavlovitch, licking his lips, as it
were, with satisfaction as he pursued this theme. <q>I am
really quite ashamed that I should have allowed myself to
be so awkward as to agitate you. Well, well; I'm going!
Now you must lie down at once and go to sleep.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You haven't told me where you live,</q> shouted Velchaninoff
after him as he left the room.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, didn't I? Pokrofsky Hotel.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch was out on the stairs now.
</p>

<p>
<q>Stop!</q> cried Velchaninoff, once more. <q>You are not
<q>running away,</q> are you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How do you mean, <q>running away?</q></q> asked Pavel
Pavlovitch, turning round at the third step, and grinning
back at him, with his eyes staring very wide open.
</p>

<p>
Instead of replying, Velchaninoff banged the door
fiercely, locked and bolted it, and went fuming back into
his room. Arrived there, he spat on the ground, as though
to get rid of the taste of something loathsome.
</p>

<p>
He then stood motionless for at least five minutes, in the
centre of the room; after which he threw himself upon his
bed, and fell asleep in an instant.
</p>

<p>
The forgotten candle burned itself out in its socket.
</p>



</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER IV.</head>

<p>
Velchaninoff slept soundly until half-past nine, at which
hour he started up, sat down on the side of his bed, and
began to think.
</p>

<p>
His thoughts quickly fixed themselves upon the death of
<q>that woman.</q>
</p>

<p>
The agitating impression wrought upon his mind by
yesterday's news as to her death had left a painful feeling
of mental perturbation.
</p>

<p>
This morning the whole of the events of nine years back
stood out before his mind's eye with extraordinary distinctness.
</p>

<p>
He had loved this woman, Natalia Vasilievna&mdash;Trusotsky's
wife,&mdash;he had loved her, and had acted the part of her
lover during the time which he had spent in their provincial
town (while engaged in business connected with a legacy);
he had lived there a whole year, though his business did
not require by any means so long a visit; in fact, the tie
above mentioned had detained him in the place.
</p>

<p>
He had been so completely under the influence of this
passion, that Natalia Vasilievna had held him in a species of
slavery. He would have obeyed the slightest whim or the
wildest caprice of the woman, at that time. He had never,
before or since, experienced anything approaching to the
infatuation she had caused.
</p>

<p>
When the time came for departing, Velchaninoff had
been in a state of such absolute despair, though the parting
was to have been but a short one, that he had begged
Natalia Vasilievna to leave all and fly across the frontier with
him; and it was only by laughing him out of the idea
(though she had at first encouraged it herself, probably for a
joke), and by unmercifully chaffing him, that the lady
eventually persuaded Velchaninoff to depart alone.
</p>

<p>
However, he had not been a couple of months in St.
Petersburg before he found himself asking himself that
question which he had never to this day been able to
answer satisfactorily, namely, <q><emph>Did</emph> he love this woman at
all, or was it nothing but the infatuation of the moment?</q>
He did not ask this question because he was conscious
of any new passion taking root in his heart; on the contrary,
during those first two months in town he had been in
that condition of mind that he had not so much as looked
at a woman, though he had met hundreds, and had returned
to his old society ways at once. And yet he knew perfectly
well that if he were to return to T&mdash;&mdash; he would instantly
fall into the meshes of his passion for Natalia Vasilievna once
more, in spite of the question which he could not answer as
to the reality of his love for her.
</p>

<p>
Five years later he was as convinced of this fact as ever,
although the very thought of it was detestable to him, and
although he did not remember the name of Natalia Vasilievna
but with loathing.
</p>

<p>
He was ashamed of that episode at T&mdash;&mdash;. He could
not understand how he (Velchaninoff) could ever have
allowed himself to become the victim of such a stupid
passion. He blushed whenever he thought of the shameful
business&mdash;blushed, and even wept for shame.
</p>

<p>
He managed to forget his remorse after a few more years&mdash;he
felt sure that he had <q>lived it down;</q> and yet now,
after nine years, here was the whole thing resuscitated by
the news of Natalia's death.
</p>

<p>
At all events, however, now, as he sat on his bed with
agitating thoughts swarming through his brain, he could not
but feel that the fact of her being dead was a consolation,
amidst all the painful reflections which the mention of her
name had called up.
</p>

<p>
<q>Surely I am a little sorry for her?</q> he asked himself.
</p>

<p>
Well, he certainly did not feel that sensation of hatred for
her now; he could think of her and judge her now without
passion of any kind, and therefore more justly.
</p>

<p>
He had long since been of opinion that in all probability
there had been nothing more in Natalia Vasilievna than is to
be found in every lady of good provincial society, and that
he himself had created the whole <q>fantasy</q> of his worship
and her worshipfulness; but though he had formed this
opinion, he always doubted its correctness, and he still felt
that doubt now. Facts existed to contradict the theory.
For instance, this Bagantoff had lived for several years at
T&mdash;&mdash;, and had been no less a victim to passion for this
woman, and had been as helpless as Velchaninoff himself
under her witchery. Bagantoff, though a young idiot (as
Velchaninoff expressed it), was nevertheless a scion of the
very highest society in St. Petersburg. His career was in
St. Petersburg, and it was significant that such a man should
have wasted five important years of his life at T&mdash;&mdash; simply
out of love for this woman. It was said that he had only
returned to Petersburg even then because the lady had had
enough of him; so that, all things considered, there must
have been something which rendered Natalia Vasilievna preeminently
attractive among women.
</p>

<p>
Yet the woman was not rich; she was not even pretty
(if not absolutely <emph>plain</emph>!) Velchaninoff had known her
when she was twenty-eight years old. Her face was capable
of taking a pleasing expression, but her eyes were not
good&mdash;they were too hard. She was a thin, bony woman
to look at. Her mind was intelligent, but narrow and one-sided.
She had tact and taste, especially as to dress. Her
character was firm and overbearing. She was never wrong
(in her own opinion) or unjust. The unfaithfulness towards
her husband never caused her the slightest remorse;
she hated corruption, and yet she was herself corrupt; and
she believed in herself absolutely. Nothing could ever have
persuaded her that she herself was actually depraved;
Velchaninoff believed that she really did not know that her
own corruption was corrupt. He considered her to be
<q>one of those women who only exist to be unfaithful wives.</q>
Such women never remain unmarried,&mdash;it is the law of their
nature to marry,&mdash;their husband is their first lover, and he
is always to blame for anything that may happen afterwards;
the unfaithful wife herself being invariably <emph>absolutely</emph> in the
right, and of course perfectly innocent.
</p>

<p>
So thought Velchaninoff; and he was convinced that
such a type of woman actually existed; but he was no less
convinced that there also existed a corresponding type of
men, born to be the husbands of such women. In his
opinion the mission of such men was to be, so to speak,
<q>permanent husbands,</q>&mdash;that is, to be husbands all their
lives, and nothing else.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff had not the smallest doubt as to the
existence of these two types, and Pavel Pavlovitch
Trusotsky was, in his opinion, an excellent representative of
the male type. Of course, the Pavel Pavlovitch of last
night was by no means the same Pavel Pavlovitch as he had
known at T&mdash;&mdash;. He had found an extraordinary change
in the man; and yet, on reflection, he was bound to admit
that the change was but natural, for that he could only
have remained what he was so long as his wife lived;
and that now he was but a part of a whole, allowed
to wander at will&mdash;that is, an imperfect being, a surprising,
an incomprehensible sort of a <emph>thing</emph>, without proper
balance.
</p>

<p>
As for the Pavel Pavlovitch of T&mdash;&mdash;, this is what
Velchaninoff remembered of him:
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch had been a husband, of course,&mdash;a
formality,&mdash;and that was all. If, for instance, he was a
clerk of department besides, he was so merely in his
capacity of, and as a part of his responsibility as&mdash;a
husband. He worked for his wife, and for her social position.
He had been thirty-five years old at that time, and
was possessed of some considerable property. He had not
shown any special talent, nor, on the other hand, any
marked incapacity in his professional employment; his
position had been decidedly a good one.
</p>

<p>
Natalia Vasilievna had been respected and looked up to
by all; not that she valued their respect in the least,&mdash;she
considered it merely as her due. She was a good hostess,
and had schooled Pavel Pavlovitch into polite manners, so
that he was able to receive and entertain the very best
society passably well.
</p>

<p>
He might be a clever man, for all Velchaninoff knew,
but as Natalia Vasilievna did not like her husband to talk
much, there was little opportunity of judging. He
may have had many good qualities, as well as bad; but the
good ones were, so to speak, kept put away in their cases,
and the bad ones were stifled and not allowed to appear.
Velchaninoff remembered, for instance, that Pavel
Pavlovitch had once or twice shown a disposition to laugh
at those about him, but this unworthy proclivity had been
very promptly subdued. He had been fond of telling stories,
but this was not allowed either; or, if permitted at all, the
anecdote was to be of the shortest and most uninteresting
description.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch had a circle of private friends outside
the house, with whom he was fain, at times, to taste the
flowing bowl; but this vicious tendency was radically
stamped out as soon as possible.
</p>

<p>
And yet, with all this, Natalia Vasilievna appeared, to
the uninitiated, to be the most obedient of wives, and
doubtless considered herself so. Pavel Pavlovitch may
have been desperately in love with her,&mdash;no one could say
as to this.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff had frequently asked himself during his life
at T&mdash;&mdash;, whether Pavel Pavlovitch ever suspected his wife
of having formed the tie with himself, of which mention has
been made. Velchaninoff had several times questioned
Natalia Vasilievna on this point, seriously enough; but had
invariably been told, with some show of annoyance, that her
husband neither did know, nor ever could know; and that
<q>all there might be to know was not his business!</q>
</p>

<p>
Another trait in her character was that she never laughed
at Pavel Pavlovitch, and never found him funny in any
sense; and that she would have been down on any person
who dared to be rude to him, at once!
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch's reference to the pleasant little readings
enjoyed by the trio nine years ago was accurate; they
used to read Dickens' novels together. Velchaninoff or
Trusotsky reading aloud, while Natalia Vasilievna worked.
The life at T&mdash;&mdash; had ended suddenly, and so far as Velchaninoff
was concerned, in a way which drove him almost to
the verge of madness. The fact is, he was simply turned
out&mdash;although it was all managed in such a way that he
never observed that he was being thrown over like an old
worn-out shoe.
</p>

<p>
A young artillery officer had appeared in the town a month
or so before Velchaninoff's departure and had made
acquaintance with the Trusotsky's. The trio became a
quartet. Before long Velchaninoff was informed that for
many reasons a separation was absolutely necessary;
Natalia Vasilievna adduced a hundred excellent reasons
why this had become unavoidable&mdash;and especially one which
quite settled the matter. After his stormy attempt to persuade
Natalia Vasilievna to fly with him to Paris&mdash;or anywhere,&mdash;Velchaninoff
had ended by going to St. Petersburg
alone&mdash;for two or three months at the <emph>very most</emph>, as he said,&mdash;otherwise
he would refuse to go at all, in spite of every
reason and argument Natalia might adduce.
</p>

<p>
Exactly two months later Velchaninoff had received a
letter from Natalia Vasilievna, begging him to come no
more to T&mdash;&mdash;, because that she already loved another.
As to the principal reason which she had brought forward
in favour of his immediate departure, she now informed
him that she had made a mistake. Velchaninoff remembered
the young artilleryman, and understood,&mdash;and so
the matter had ended, once and for all. A year or two
after this Bagantoff appeared at T&mdash;&mdash;, and an intimacy
between Natalia Vasilievna and the former had sprung up
which lasted for five years. This long period of constancy,
Velchaninoff attributed to advancing age on the
part of Natalia. He sat on the side of his bed for nearly
an hour and thought. At last he roused himself, rang
for Mavra and his coffee, drank it off quickly&mdash;dressed&mdash;and
punctually at eleven was on his way to the Pokrofsky
Hotel: he felt rather ashamed of his behaviour to Pavel
Pavlovitch last night. Velchaninoff put down all that
phantasmagoria of the trying of the lock and so on to
Pavel Pavlovitch's drunken condition and to other reasons,&mdash;but
he did not know why he was now on his way to make
fresh relations with the husband of that woman, since their
acquaintanceship and intercourse had come to so natural
and simple a termination; yet something seemed to draw
him thither&mdash;some strong current of impulse,&mdash;and he
went.
</p>



</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER V.</head>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch was not thinking of <q>running away,</q>
and goodness knows why Velchaninoff should have asked
him such a question last night&mdash;he did not know himself
why he had said it!
</p>

<p>
He was directed to the Petrofsky Hotel, and found the
building at once. At the hotel he was told that Pavel
Pavlovitch had now engaged a furnished lodging in the
back part of the same house.
</p>

<p>
Mounting the dirty and narrow stairs indicated, as far as
the third storey, he suddenly became aware of someone
crying. It sounded like the weeping of a child of some
seven or eight years of age; it was a bitter, but a more or
less suppressed sort of crying, and with it came the sound
of a grown man's voice, apparently trying to quiet the child&mdash;anxious
that its sobbing and crying should not be heard,&mdash;and
yet only succeeding in making it cry the louder.
</p>

<p>
The man's voice did not seem in any way sympathetic
with the child's grief; and the latter appeared to be begging
for forgiveness.
</p>

<p>
Making his way into a narrow dark passage with two doors
on each side of it, Velchaninoff met a stout-looking, elderly
woman, in very careless morning attire, and inquired for
Pavel Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
She tapped the door with her fingers in response to his
inquiry&mdash;the same door, apparently, whence issued the
noises just mentioned. Her fat face seemed to flush with
indignation as she did so.
</p>

<p>
<q>He appears to be amusing himself in there!</q> she said,
and proceeded downstairs.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff was about to knock, but thought better of
it and opened the door without ceremony.
</p>

<p>
In the very middle of a room furnished with plain, but
abundant furniture, stood Pavel Pavlovitch in his shirt-sleeves,
very red in the face, trying to persuade a little girl
to do something or other, and using cries and gestures,
and what looked to Velchaninoff very like kicks, in order
to effect his purpose. The child appeared to be some seven
or eight years of age, and was poorly dressed in a short
black stuff frock. She seemed to be in a most hysterical
condition, crying and stretching out her arms to Pavel
Pavlovitch, as though begging and entreating him to allow
her to do whatever it might be she desired.
</p>

<p>
On Velchaninoff's appearance the scene changed in an
instant. No sooner did her eyes fall on the visitor than
the child made for the door of the next room, with a cry of
alarm; while Pavel Pavlovitch&mdash;thrown out for one little
instant&mdash;immediately relaxed into smiles of great sweetness&mdash;exactly
as he had done last night, when Velchaninoff suddenly
opened his front door and caught him standing outside.
</p>

<p>
<q>Alexey Ivanovitch!</q> he cried in real surprise; <q>who
ever would have thought it! Sit down&mdash;sit down&mdash;take
the sofa&mdash;or this chair,&mdash;sit down, my dear sir! I'll just
put on&mdash;&mdash;</q> and he rushed for his coat and threw it on,
leaving his waistcoat behind.
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't stand on ceremony with me,</q> said Velchaninoff
sitting down; <q>stay as you are!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, sir, no! excuse me&mdash;I insist upon standing on
ceremony. There, now! I'm a little more respectable!
Dear me, now, who ever would have thought of seeing <emph>you</emph>
here!&mdash;not I, for one!</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch sat down on the edge of a chair, which
he turned so as to face Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>And pray <emph>why</emph> shouldn't you have expected me? I
told you last night that I was coming this morning!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I thought you wouldn't come, sir&mdash;I did indeed; in
fact, when I thought over yesterday's visit, I despaired of
ever seeing you again: I did indeed, sir!</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff glanced round the room meanwhile. The
place was very untidy; the bed was unmade; the clothes
thrown about the floor; on the table were two coffee
tumblers with the dregs of coffee still in them, and a bottle
of champagne half finished, and with a tumbler standing
alongside it. He glanced at the next room, but all was
quiet there; the little girl had hidden herself, and was as
still as a mouse.
</p>

<p>
<q>You don't mean to say you drink that stuff at this time
of day?</q> he asked, indicating the champagne bottle.
</p>

<p>
<q>It's only a remnant,</q> explained Pavel Pavlovitch, a
little confused.
</p>

<p>
<q>My word! You <emph>are</emph> a changed man!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Bad habits, sir; and all of a sudden. All dating from
that time, sir. Give you my word, I couldn't resist it. But
I'm all right now&mdash;I'm not drunk&mdash;I shan't talk twaddle as
I did last night; don't be afraid sir, it's all right! From
that very day, sir; give you my word it is! And if anyone
had told me half a year ago that I should become like this,&mdash;if
they had shown me my face in a glass then as I should
be <emph>now</emph>, I should have given them the lie, sir; I should
indeed!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Hem! Then you <emph>were</emph> drunk last night?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes&mdash;I was!</q> admitted Pavel Pavlovitch, a little guiltily&mdash;<q>not
exactly <emph>drunk</emph>, a little <emph>beyond</emph> drunk!&mdash;I tell you
this by way of explanation, because I'm always worse <emph>after</emph>
being drunk! If I'm only a little drunk, still the violence
and unreasonableness of intoxication come out afterwards,
and stay out too; and then I feel my grief the more keenly. I
daresay my grief is responsible for my drinking. I am
capable of making an awful fool of myself and offending
people when I'm drunk. I daresay I seemed strange enough
to you last night?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't you remember what you said and did?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Assuredly I do&mdash;I remember everything!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Listen to me, Pavel Pavlovitch: I have thought it over
and have come to very much the same conclusion as you
did yourself,</q> began Velchaninoff gently; <q>besides&mdash;I
believe I was a little too irritable towards you last night&mdash;too
impatient,&mdash;I admit it gladly; the fact is&mdash;I am not very
well sometimes, and your sudden arrival, you know, in the
middle of the night&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In the middle of the night: you are quite right&mdash;it
was!</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch, wagging his head assentingly;
<q>how in the world could I have brought myself to do
such a thing? I shouldn't have come in, though, if you hadn't
opened the door. I should have gone as I came. I called on
you about a week ago, and did not find you at home, and I
daresay I should never have called again; for I am rather
proud&mdash;Alexey Ivanovitch&mdash;in spite of my present state.
Whenever I have met you in the streets I have always said to
myself, <q>What if he doesn't know me and rejects me&mdash;nine
years is no joke!</q> and I did not dare try you for fear of
being snubbed. Yesterday, thanks to that sort of thing,
you know,</q> (he pointed to the bottle), <q>I didn't know what
time it was, and&mdash;it's lucky you are the kind of man you
are, Alexey Ivanovitch, or I should despair of preserving
your acquaintance, after yesterday! You remember old
times, Alexey Ivanovitch!</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff listened keenly to all this. The man seemed
to be talking seriously enough, and even with some dignity;
and yet he had not believed a single word that Pavel
Pavlovitch had uttered from the very first moment that he
entered the room.
</p>

<p>
<q>Tell me, Pavel Pavlovitch,</q> said Velchaninoff at last,
<q>&mdash;I see you are not quite alone here,&mdash;whose little girl is
that I saw when I came in?</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch looked surprised and raised his eyebrow;
but he gazed back at Velchaninoff with candour and
apparent amiability:
</p>

<p>
<q>Whose little girl? Why that's our Liza!</q> he said,
smiling affably.
</p>

<p>
<q>What Liza?</q> asked Velchaninoff,&mdash;and something
seemed to cause him to shudder inwardly.
</p>

<p>
The sensation was dreadfully sudden. Just now, on
entering the room and seeing Liza, he had felt surprised
more or less,&mdash;but had not been conscious of the slightest
feeling of presentiment,&mdash;indeed he had had no special
thought about the matter, at the moment.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why&mdash;<emph>our</emph> Liza!&mdash;our daughter Liza!</q> repeated Pavel
Pavlovitch, smiling.
</p>

<p>
<q>Your daughter? Do you mean to say that you and
Natalia Vasilievna had children?</q> asked Velchaninoff
timidly, and in a very low tone of voice indeed!
</p>

<p>
<q>Of course&mdash;but&mdash;what a fool I am&mdash;how in the world
should <emph>you</emph> know! Providence sent us the gift after you
had gone!</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch jumped off his chair in apparently
pleasurable excitement.
</p>

<p>
<q>I heard nothing of it!</q> said Velchaninoff, looking very
pale.
</p>

<p>
<q>How should you? how should you?</q> repeated Pavel
Pavlovitch with ineffable sweetness. <q>We had quite lost
hope of any children&mdash;as you may remember,&mdash;when
suddenly Heaven sent us this little one. And, oh! my
feelings&mdash;Heaven alone knows what I felt! Just a year
after you went, I think&mdash;no, wait a bit&mdash;not a year by a
long way!&mdash;Let's see, you left us in October, or November,
didn't you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I left T&mdash;&mdash; on the twelfth of September, I remember
well.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Hum! September was it? Dear me! Well, then, let's
see&mdash;September, October, November, December, January,
February, March, April&mdash;to the 8th of May&mdash;that was Liza's
birthday&mdash;eight months all but a bit; and if you could only
have seen the dear departed, how rejoiced&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Show her to me&mdash;call her in!</q> the words seemed to
tear themselves from Velchaninoff, whether he liked it
or no.
</p>

<p>
<q>Certainly&mdash;this moment!</q> cried Pavel Pavlovitch,
forgetting that he had not finished his previous sentence, or
ignoring the fact; and he hastily left the room, and entered
the small chamber adjoining.
</p>

<p>
Three or four minutes passed by, while Velchaninoff
heard the rapid interchange of whispers going on, and an
occasional rather louder sound of Liza's voice, apparently
entreating her father to leave her alone&mdash;so Velchaninoff
concluded.
</p>

<p>
At last the two came out.
</p>

<p>
<q>There you are&mdash;she's dreadfully shy and proud,</q> said
Pavel Pavlovitch; <q>just like her mother.</q>
</p>

<p>
Liza entered the room without tears, but with eyes downcast,
her father leading her by the hand. She was a tall,
slight, and very pretty little girl. She raised her large blue
eyes to the visitor's face with curiosity; but only glanced
surlily at him, and dropped them again. There was that
in her expression that one always sees in children when
they look on some new guest for the first time&mdash;retiring to
a corner, and looking out at him thence seriously and
mistrustingly; only that there was a something in her manner
beyond the usual childish mistrust&mdash;so, at least thought
Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
Her father brought her straight up to the visitor.
</p>

<p>
<q>There&mdash;this gentleman knew mother very well. He was
our friend; you mustn't be shy,&mdash;give him your hand!</q>
</p>

<p>
The child bowed slightly, and timidly stretched out her
hand.
</p>

<p>
<q>Natalia Vasilievna never would teach her to curtsey;
she liked her to bow, English fashion, and give her hand,</q>
explained Pavel Pavlovitch, gazing intently at Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff knew perfectly well that the other was
keenly examining him at this moment, but he made no
attempt to conceal his agitation: he sat motionless on his
chair and held the child's hand in his, gazing into her face
the while.
</p>

<p>
But Liza was apparently much preoccupied, and did not
take her eyes off her father's face; she listened timidly to
every word he said.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff recognised her large blue eyes at once; but
what specially struck him was the refined pallor of her face,
and the colour of her hair; these traits were altogether too
significant, in his eyes! Her features, on the other hand,
and the set of her lips, reminded him keenly of Natalia
Vasilievna. Meanwhile Pavel Pavlovitch was in the
middle of some apparently most interesting tale&mdash;one of
great sentiment seemingly,&mdash;but Velchaninoff did not hear
a word of it until the last few words struck upon his ear:
</p>

<p>
<q>... So that you can't imagine what our joy was
when Providence sent us this gift, Alexey Ivanovitch! She
was everything to me, for I felt that if it should be the will
of Heaven to deprive me of my other joy, I should still
have Liza left to me; that's what I felt, sir, I did
indeed!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And Natalia Vasilievna?</q> asked Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, Natalia Vasilievna&mdash;</q> began Pavel Pavlovitch,
smiling with one side of his mouth; <q>she never used to
like to say much&mdash;as you know yourself; but she told me
on her deathbed&mdash;deathbed! you know, sir&mdash;to the very day
of her death she used to get so angry and say that they were
trying to cure her with a lot of nasty medicines when she
had nothing the matter but a simple little feverish attack;
and that when Koch arrived (you remember our old
doctor Koch?) he would make her all right in a fortnight.
Why, five hours before she died she was talking of fixing
that day three weeks for a visit to her Aunt, Liza's godmother,
at her country place!</q> Velchaninoff here started
from his seat, but still held the child's hand. He could not
help thinking that there was something reproachful in the
girl's persistent stare in her father's face.
</p>

<p>
<q>Is she ill?</q> he asked hurriedly, and his voice had a
strange tone in it.
</p>

<p>
<q>No! I don't think so</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch; <q>but, you
see our way of living here, and all that: she's a strange
child and very nervous, besides! After her mother's
death she was quite ill and hysterical for a fortnight. Just
before you came in she was crying like anything; and do
you know what about, sir? Do you hear me, Liza?&mdash;You
listen!&mdash;Simply because I was going out, and wished to leave
her behind, and because she said I didn't love her so well as
I used to in her mother's time. That's what she pitches
into me for! Fancy a child like this getting hold of such an
idea!&mdash;a child who ought to be playing at dolls, instead of
developing ideas of that sort! The thing is, she has no one
to play with here.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Then&mdash;then&mdash;are you two quite alone here?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite! a servant comes in once a day, that's
all!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And when you go out, do you leave her quite alone?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Of course! What else am I to do? Yesterday
I locked her in that room, and that's what all the
tears were about this morning. What could I do?
the day before yesterday she went down into the
yard all by herself, and a boy took a shot at her
head with a stone! Not only that, but she must
needs go and cling on to everybody she met, and ask where
I had gone to! That's not so very pleasant, you see! But I
oughtn't to complain when I say I am going out for an hour
and then stay out till four in the morning, as I did last night!
The landlady came and let her out: she had the door broken
open! Nice for my feelings, eh! It's all the result of
the eclipse that came over my life; nothing but that,
sir!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Papa!</q> said the child, timidly and anxiously.
</p>

<p>
<q>Now, then! none of that again! What did I tell you yesterday?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I won't; I won't!</q> cried the child hurriedly, clasping her
hands before her entreatingly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Come! things can't be allowed to go on in this way!</q>
said Velchaninoff impatiently, and with authority. <q>In
the first place, you are a man of property; how can you
possibly live in a hole like this, and in such disorder?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>This place! Oh, but we shall probably have left this
place within a week; and I've spent a lot of money here, as
it is, though I may be 'a man of property;' and&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well, that'll do,</q> interrupted Velchaninoff with
growing impatience, <q>now, I'll make you a proposition: you
have just said that you intend to stay another week&mdash;perhaps
two. I have a house here&mdash;or rather I know a
family where I am as much at home as at my own fireside,
and have been so for twenty years. The family I mean is
the Pogoryeltseffs&mdash;Alexander Pavlovitch Pogoryeltseff is a
state councillor (he may be of use to you in your business!)
They are now living in the country&mdash;they have a beautiful
country villa; Claudia Petrovna, the lady of the house,
is like a sister&mdash;like a mother to me; they have eight
children. Let me take Liza down to them without loss of
time! they'll receive her with joy, and they'll treat her like
their own little daughter&mdash;they will, indeed!</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff was in a great hurry, and much excited, and
he did not conceal his feelings.
</p>

<p>
<q>I'm afraid it's impossible!</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch with
a grimace, looking straight into his visitor's eyes, very cunningly,
as it seemed to Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why! why, impossible?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, why! to let the child go&mdash;so suddenly, you know, of
course with such a sincere well-wisher as yourself&mdash;it's not
that!&mdash;but a strange house&mdash;and such swells, too!&mdash;I don't
know whether they would receive her!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But I tell you I'm like a son of the house!</q> cried
Velchaninoff, almost angrily. <q>Claudia Petrovna will be
delighted to take her, at one word from me! She'd receive
her as though she were my own daughter. Deuce take it,
sir, you know you are only humbugging me,&mdash;what's the
use of talking about it?</q>
</p>

<p>
He stamped his foot.
</p>

<p>
<q>No&mdash;no! I mean to say&mdash;don't it look a little strange?
Oughtn't I to call once or twice first?&mdash;such a smart house as
you say theirs is&mdash;don't you see&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I tell you it's the simplest house in the world;
it isn't <q>smart</q> in the least bit,</q> cried Velchaninoff;
<q>they have a lot of children: it will make another
girl of her!&mdash;I'll introduce you there myself, to-morrow,
if you like. Of course you'll have to go and thank
them, and all that. You shall go down every day with me,
if you please.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, but&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nonsense! You know it's nonsense! Now look here: you
come to me this evening&mdash;I'll put you up for the night&mdash;and
we'll start off early to-morrow and be down there by twelve.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Benefactor!&mdash;and I may spend the night at your house?</q>
cried Pavel Pavlovitch, instantly consenting to the plan with
the greatest cordiality,&mdash;<q>you are really <emph>too</emph> good! And
where's their country house?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>At the Liesnoy.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But look here, how about her dress? Such a house, you
know,&mdash;a father's heart shrinks&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nonsense!&mdash;she's in mourning&mdash;what else could she
wear but a black dress like this? it's exactly the thing; you
couldn't imagine anything more so!&mdash;you might let her
have some clean linen with her, and give her a cleaner
neck-handkerchief.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Directly, directly. We'll get her linen together in a
couple of minutes&mdash;it's just home from the wash!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Send for a carriage&mdash;can you? Tell them to let us
have it at once, so as not to waste time.</q>
</p>

<p>
But now an unexpected obstacle arose: Liza absolutely
rejected the plan; she had listened to it with terror, and if
Velchaninoff had, in his excited argument with Pavel Pavlovitch,
had time to glance at the child's face, he would have
observed her expression of absolute despair at this moment.
</p>

<p>
<q>I won't go!</q> she said, quietly but firmly.
</p>

<p>
<q>There&mdash;look at that! Just like her mamma!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I'm <emph>not</emph> like mamma, I'm <emph>not</emph> like mamma!</q> cried Liza,
wringing her little hands in despair. <q>Oh, papa&mdash;papa!</q>
she added, <q>if you desert me&mdash;</q> she suddenly threw herself
upon the alarmed Velchaninoff&mdash;<q>If you take me away&mdash;</q>
she cried&mdash;<q>I'll&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
But Liza had no time to finish her sentence, for Pavel
Pavlovitch suddenly seized her by the arm and collar and
hustled her into the next room with unconcealed rage. For
several minutes Velchaninoff listened to the whispering going
on there,&mdash;whisperings and seemingly subdued crying on
the part of Liza. He was about to follow the pair,
when suddenly out came Pavel Pavlovitch, and stated&mdash;with
a disagreeable grin&mdash;that Liza would come
directly.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff tried not to look at him and kept his eyes
fixed on the other side of the room.
</p>

<p>
The elderly woman whom Velchaninoff had met on the
stairs also made her appearance, and packed Liza's things
into a neat little carpet bag.
</p>

<p>
<q>Is it you that are going to take the little lady away,
sir?</q> she asked; <q>if so, you are doing a good deed! She's
a nice quiet child, and you are saving her from goodness
knows what, here!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! come&mdash;Maria Sisevna,</q>&mdash;began Pavel Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well? What? Isn't it true! Arn't you ashamed to let a
girl of her intelligence see the things that you allow to go on
here? The carriage has arrived for you, sir,&mdash;<emph>you</emph> ordered
one for the Liesnoy, didn't you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, good luck to you!</q>
</p>

<p>
Liza came out, looking very pale and with downcast eyes;
she took her bag, but never glanced in Velchaninoff's
direction. She restrained herself and did not throw herself
upon her father, as she had done before&mdash;not even to say
good-bye. She evidently did not wish to look at him.
</p>

<p>
Her father kissed her and patted her head in correct
form; her lip curled during the operation, the chin trembled
a little, but she did not raise her eyes to her father's.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch looked pale, and his hands shook;
Velchaninoff saw that plainly enough, although he did his
best not to see the man at all. He (Velchaninoff) had but
one thought, and that was how to get away at once!
</p>

<p>
Downstairs was old Maria Sisevna, waiting to say good-bye;
and more kissing was done. Liza had just climbed into
the carriage when suddenly she caught sight of her father's
face; she gave a loud cry and wrung her hands,&mdash;in another
minute she would have been out of the carriage and away,
but luckily the vehicle went on and she was too late!
</p>



</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER VI.</head>

<p>
<q>Are you feeling faint?</q> asked Velchaninoff of his companion,
frightened out of his wits: <q>I'll tell him to stop and
get you some water, shall I?</q>
</p>

<p>
She looked at him angrily and reproachfully.
</p>

<p>
<q>Where are you taking me to?</q> she asked coldly and
abruptly.
</p>

<p>
<q>To a very beautiful house, Liza. There are plenty of
children,&mdash;they'll all love you there, they are so kind! Don't
be angry with me, Liza; I wish you well, you know!</q>
</p>

<p>
In truth, Velchaninoff would have looked strange at
this moment to any acquaintance, if such had happened to
see him!
</p>

<p>
<q>How&mdash;how&mdash;how&mdash;oh! <emph>how</emph> wicked you are!</q> said
Liza, fighting with suppressed tears, and flashing her fine
angry eyes at him.
</p>

<p>
<q>But Liza&mdash;I&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You are bad&mdash;bad&mdash;and wicked!</q> cried Liza. She
wrung her hands.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff was beside himself.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, Liza, Liza! if only you knew what despair you are
causing me!</q> he said.
</p>

<p>
<q>Is it true that he is coming down to-morrow?</q>
asked the child haughtily&mdash;<q>is it true or not?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite true&mdash;I shall bring him down myself,&mdash;I shall
take him and bring him!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He will deceive you somehow!</q> cried the child,
drooping her eyes.
</p>

<p>
<q>Doesn't he love you, then, Liza?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Has he ill-treated you,&mdash;has he?</q>
</p>

<p>
Liza looked gloomily at her questioner, and said nothing.
She then turned away from him and sat still and depressed.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff commenced to talk: he tried to win her,&mdash;he
spoke warmly&mdash;excitedly&mdash;feverishly.
</p>

<p>
Liza listened incredulously and with a hostile air,&mdash;but
still she listened. Her attention delighted him beyond
measure;&mdash;he went so far as to explain to her what it meant
when a man took to drink. He said that he loved her and
would himself look after her father.
</p>

<p>
At last Liza raised her eyes and gazed fixedly at him.
</p>

<p>
Then Velchaninoff began to speak of her mother and of
how well he had known her; and he saw that his tales
attracted her. Little by little she began to reply to his
questions, but very cautiously and in an obstinately monosyllabic
way.
</p>

<p>
She would answer nothing to his chief inquiries; as to
her former relations with her father, for instance, she maintained
an obstinate silence.
</p>

<p>
While speaking to her, Velchaninoff held the child's hand
in his own, as before; and she did not try to take it
away.
</p>

<p>
Liza said enough to make it apparent that she had loved
her father more than her mother at first, because that her
father had loved the child better than her mother did;
but that when her mother had died and was lying dead, Liza
wept over her and kissed her, and ever since then she had
loved her mother more than all&mdash;all there was in the whole
world&mdash;and that every night she thought of her and loved
her.
</p>

<p>
But Liza was very proud, and suddenly recollecting herself
and finding that she was saying a great deal more than
she had meant to reveal, she paused, and relapsed into
obstinate silence once more, and gazed at Velchaninoff
with something like hatred in her eyes, considering that he
had beguiled her into the revelations just made.
</p>

<p>
By the end of the journey, however, her hysterical condition
was nearly over, but she was very silent and sat looking
morosely about her, obstinately silent and gloomy, like a
little wild animal.
</p>

<p>
The fact that she was being taken to a strange house
where she had never been before did not seem so far to
weigh upon her; Velchaninoff saw clearly enough that
other things distressed her, and principally that she was
ashamed&mdash;ashamed that her father should have let her go so
easily&mdash;thrown her away, as it were&mdash;into Velchaninoff's
arms.
</p>

<p>
<q>She's ill,</q> thought the latter, <q>and perhaps very ill;
she has been bullied and ill-treated. Oh! that drunken,
blackguardly wretch of a fellow!</q> He hurried on the coachman.
Velchaninoff trusted greatly to the fresh air, to the
garden, to the children, to the new life, now; as to the
future, he was in no sort of doubt at all, his hopes were
clear and defined. One thing he was quite sure of, and
that was that he had never before felt what now swelled
within his soul, and that the sensation would last for ever
and ever.
</p>

<p>
<q>I have an object at last! this is Life!</q> he said to himself
enthusiastically.
</p>

<p>
Many thoughts welled into his brain just now, but he
would have none of them; he did not care to think of
details at this moment, for without details the future was all
so clear and so beautiful, and so safe and indestructible!
</p>

<p>
The basis of his plan was simple enough; it was simply
this, in the language of his own thoughts:
</p>

<p>
<q>I shall so work upon that drunken little blackguard that
he will leave Liza with the Pogoryeltseffs, and go away
alone&mdash;at first, <q>for a time,</q> of course!&mdash;and so Liza shall
remain behind for me! what more do I want? The plan
will suit him, too!&mdash;else why does he bully her like this?</q>
</p>

<p>
The carriage arrived at last.
</p>

<p>
It was certainly a very beautiful place. They were met
first of all by a troop of noisy children, who overflowed on
to the front-door steps. Velchaninoff had not been down
for some time, and the delight of the little ones to see him
was excessive&mdash;they were very fond of him.
</p>

<p>
The elder ones shouted, before he had left the carriage,
by way of chaff:
</p>

<p>
<q>How's the lawsuit getting on, eh?</q> and the smaller
gang took up the joke, and all clamoured the same question:
it was a pet joke in this establishment to chaff
Velchaninoff about his lawsuit. But when Liza climbed
down the carriage steps, she was instantly surrounded and
stared at with true juvenile curiosity. Then Claudia
Petrovna and her husband came out, and both of them
good-humouredly bantered Velchaninoff about his lawsuit.
</p>

<p>
Claudia Petrovna was a lady of some thirty-seven
summers, stout and well-favoured, and with a sweet fresh-looking
face. Her husband was a man of fifty-five, a
clever and long-headed man of the world, but above all, a
good and kind-hearted friend to anyone requiring kindness.
</p>

<p>
The Pogoryeltseffs' house was in the full sense of the
word a <q>home</q> to Velchaninoff, as the latter had stated.
There was rather more here, however; for, twenty years since
Claudia had very nearly married young Velchaninoff almost
a boy at that time, and a student at the university.
</p>

<p>
This had been his first experience of love&mdash;and very hot
and fiery and funny&mdash;and sweet it was! The end of it
was, however, that Claudia married Mr Pogoryeltseff. Five
years later she and Velchaninoff had met again, and a quiet
candid friendship had sprung up between them. Since then
there had always been a warmth, a speciality about their
friendship, a radiance which overspread it and glorified their
relations one to the other. There was nothing here that
Velchaninoff could remember with shame&mdash;all was pure and
sweet; and this was perhaps the reason why the friendship
was specially dear to Velchaninoff; he had not experienced
many such platonic intimacies.
</p>

<p>
In this house Velchaninoff was simple and happy, confessed
his sins, played with the children and lectured them,
and never bothered his head about outside matters; he had
promised the Pogoryeltseffs that he would live a few more
years alone in the world, and then move over to their
household for good and all; and he looked forward to that
good time coming with all seriousness.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff now gave all the information about Liza
which he thought fit, though his simple request would have
been amply sufficient here.
</p>

<p>
Claudia Petrovna kissed the little <q>orphan,</q> and promised
to do all she possibly could for her; and the
children carried Liza off to play in the garden. Half an
hour passed in conversation, and then Velchaninoff rose to
depart: he was in such a hurry, that his friends could not
help remarking upon the fact. He had not been near them
for three weeks, they said, and now he only stayed half an
hour! Velchaninoff laughed and promised to come down
to-morrow. Someone observed that Velchaninoff's state
of agitation was remarkable, even for <emph>him</emph>! Whereupon
the latter jumped up, seized Claudia Petrovna's hand,
and, under pretence of having forgotten to tell her something
most important about Liza, he led her into another
room.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you remember,</q> he began, <q>what I told you, and
only you,&mdash;even your husband does not know of it&mdash;about
my year of life down at T&mdash;&mdash;?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh yes! only too well! You have often spoken of it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No&mdash;I did not <q>speak about it,</q> I <emph>confessed</emph>, and only to
yourself; but I never told you the lady's name. It was
Trusotsky, the wife of this Trusotsky; it is she who has
died, and this little Liza is her child&mdash;<emph>my</emph> child!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Is this certain? Are you quite sure there is no mistake?</q>
asked Claudia Petrovna, with some agitation.
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite, quite certain!</q> said Velchaninoff enthusiastically.
He then gave a short, hasty, and excited narrative of all
that had occurred. Claudia had heard it all before, excepting
the lady's name.
</p>

<p>
The fact is, Velchaninoff had always been so afraid that
one of his friends might some fine day meet Madame
Trusotsky at T&mdash;&mdash;, and wonder how in the world he
could have loved such a woman as that, that he had never
revealed her name to a single soul; not even to Claudia
Petrovna, his great friend.
</p>

<p>
<q>And does the <q>father</q> know nothing of it?</q> asked
Claudia, having heard the tale out.
</p>

<p>
<q>N&mdash;no; he knows&mdash;you see, that's just what is
bothering me now. I haven't sifted the matter as yet,</q>
resumed Velchaninoff hotly. <q rend='pre'>He must know&mdash;he <emph>does</emph>
know. I remarked that fact both yesterday and to-day.
But I wish to discover <emph>how much</emph> he knows. That's why I
am hurrying back now; he is coming to-night. He knows
all about Bagantoff; but how about myself? You know how
such wives can deceive their husbands! If an angel from
Heaven were to come down and convict a woman, her husband
will still trust her, and give the angel the lie.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Oh! don't nod your head at me, don't judge me! I
have long since judged and convicted myself. You see,
this morning I felt so sure that he knew all, that I compromised
myself before him. Fancy, I was really ashamed
of having been rude to him last night. He only called in
to see me out of the pure unconquerably malicious desire to
show me that he knew all the offence, and knew who was
the offender! I behaved like a fool; I gave myself into
his hands too easily; I was too heated; he came at such a
feverish moment for me. I tell you, he has been bullying
Liza, simply to <q>let off bile,</q>&mdash;you understand. He needs
a safety-valve for his offended feelings, and vents them upon
<emph>anyone</emph>, even a little child!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It is exasperation, and quite natural. We must treat
him in a Christian spirit, my friend; and do you know, I
wish to change my way of treating him, entirely; I wish to
be particularly kind to him. That will be a good action
on my part, for I am to blame before him, I know I am;
there's no disguising the fact! Besides, once at T&mdash;&mdash;, it
so happened that I required four thousand roubles at a
moment's notice. Well, the fellow gave me the money,
without a receipt, at once, and with every manifestation of
delight to be able to serve me! And I took the money
from his hands,&mdash;I did, indeed! I took it as though he
were a friend. Think of that!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well; only be careful!</q> said Claudia Petrovna.
<q>You are so enthusiastic that I am really alarmed for you!
Of course Liza shall now be no less than my own daughter
to me; but there is so much to know and to settle yet!
Above all, be very careful and observant! You are not
nearly careful enough when you are happy! You are much
too exalted an individual to be cautious, when you are
happy!</q> she added with a smile.
</p>

<p>
The whole family went out to see Velchaninoff off. The
children brought Liza along with them; they had been
playing in the garden. They seemed to look at her now
with even more perplexity then at first! The girl became
dreadfully shy when Velchaninoff kissed her before all, and
promised to come down next day and bring her father with
him. To the last moment she did not say a single word,
and never looked at him at all; but just before he was
about to start she seized his hand and drew him away to
one side, looking imploringly in his face: she evidently
had something to say to him. Velchaninoff immediately
took her into an adjoining room.
</p>

<p>
<q>What is it, Liza?</q> he asked, kindly and encouragingly;
but she drew him farther away,&mdash;into the very farthest
corner of the room, anxious to get well out of sight and
hearing of the rest.
</p>

<p>
<q>What is it, Liza? What is it?</q>
</p>

<p>
But she was still silent, and could not make up her mind
to speak; she stared with her motionless, large blue eyes,
into his face, and in every lineament of her little face was
betrayed the wildest terror and anxiety.
</p>

<p>
<q>He'll&mdash;hang himself!</q> she whispered at last, as though
she were talking in her sleep.
</p>

<p>
<q>Who will hang himself?</q> asked Velchaninoff, in alarm.
</p>

<p>
<q>He will&mdash;<emph>he</emph>! He tried to hang himself to a hook last
night!</q> said the child, panting with haste and excitement;
<q>I saw it myself! To-day he tried it again,&mdash;he wishes to
hang himself; he told me so!&mdash;he told me so! He wanted
to, long ago; he has always wanted to do it! I saw it myself&mdash;in
the night!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Impossible!</q> muttered Velchaninoff, incredulously.
</p>

<p>
Liza suddenly threw herself into his arms, kissed his
hands, and cried. She could hardly breathe for sobbing;
she was begging and imploring Velchaninoff, but he could
not understand what she was trying to say.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff never afterwards forgot the terrible look of
this distressed child; he thought of it waking and thought
of it sleeping&mdash;how she had come to him in her despair as
to her last hope, and hysterically begged and prayed him to
help her! <q>And to think of her being so deeply attached
to him!</q> he reflected jealously, as he drove, impatient and
feverish, towards town. <q>She said herself that she loved
her mother better;&mdash;perhaps she hates him, and doesn't
love him at all! And what's all that nonsense about
<q>hanging himself!</q> What did she mean by that? As if he
would hang himself, the fool! I must sift the matter&mdash;the
whole matter. I must settle this business once and for ever&mdash;and
quickly!</q>
</p>



</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER VII.</head>

<p>
He was in a great hurry to <q>know all.</q> In order to lose
no time about finding out what he felt he must know at
once, he told the coachman to drive him straight to
Trusotsky's rooms. On the way he changed his mind; <q>let
him come to me, himself,</q> he thought, <q>and meanwhile I
can attend to my cursed law business.</q>
</p>

<p>
But to-day he really felt that he was too absent to attend
to anything at all; and at five o'clock he set out with the
intention of dining. And at this moment, for the first time,
an amusing idea struck him. What if he really only
hindered his law business by meddling as he did, and
hunting his wretched lawyer about the place, when the
latter plainly avoided meeting him? Velchaninoff laughed
merrily over this idea. <q>And yet,</q> he thought; <q>if this
notion had struck me in the evening instead of now, how
angry I should have been!</q> He laughed again, more
merrily than before. But in spite of his merriness he grew
more and more thoughtful and impatient, and could settle
to nothing, nor could he think out what he most wanted to
reflect upon.
</p>

<p>
<q>I <emph>must</emph> have that fellow here!</q> he said at length; <q>I
must read the mystery of <emph>him</emph> first of all, and then I can
settle what to do next. There's a duel in this business!</q>
</p>

<p>
Returning home at seven o'clock he did not find Pavel
Pavlovitch there, which fact first surprised him, then
angered him, then depressed him, and at last, frightened
him.
</p>

<p>
<q>God knows, God knows how it will all end!</q> he cried;
first trying to settle himself on a sofa, and then marching
up and down the room, and all the while looking at his
watch every other minute.
</p>

<p>
At length&mdash;at about nine o'clock&mdash;Pavel Pavlovitch
appeared.
</p>

<p>
<q>If this man was cunning enough to mean it he could
not have managed better in order to put me into a state of
nervousness!</q> thought Velchaninoff, though his heart
bounded for joy to see his guest arrive.
</p>

<p>
To Velchaninoff's cordial inquiry as to why he was so
late, Pavel Pavlovitch smiled disagreeably&mdash;took a seat with
easy familiarity, carelessly threw his crapebound hat on a
chair,&mdash;and made himself perfectly at home. Velchaninoff
observed and took stock of the careless manner adopted by
his visitor; it was not like yesterday. Velchaninoff then
quietly, and in a few words, gave Pavel Pavlovitch an
account of what he had done with Liza, of how kindly she
had been received, of how good it would be for the child
down there; then he led the conversation to the topic of
the Pogoryeltseffs, leaving Liza out of the talking altogether,
and spoke of how kind the whole family were, of how long
he had known them, and so on.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch listened absently, occasionally looking
ironically at his host from under his eyelashes.
</p>

<p>
<q>What an enthusiast you are!</q> he muttered at last,
smiling very unpleasantly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Hum, you seem in a bad humour to-day!</q> remarked
Velchaninoff with annoyance.
</p>

<p>
<q>And why shouldn't I be as wicked as my neighbours?</q>
cried Pavel Pavlovitch suddenly! He said this so abruptly
that he gave one the idea that he had pounced out of a
corner where he had been lurking, on purpose to make a
dash at the first opportunity.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh dear me! do as you like, pray!</q> laughed Velchaninoff;
<q>I only thought something had put you out,
perhaps!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>So it has,</q> cried Pavel Pavlovitch, as though proud of
the fact.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, what was it?</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch waited a moment or two before he
replied.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why it's that Stepan Michailovitch Bagantoff of
ours&mdash;up to his tricks again; he's a shining light among the
highest circles of society&mdash;he is!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Wouldn't he receive you again&mdash;or what?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>N&mdash;no! not quite that, this time; on the contrary I
was allowed to go in for the first time on record, and I had
the honour of musing over his features, too!&mdash;but he
happened to be a corpse, that's all!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What! Bagantoff dead?</q> cried Velchaninoff, in the
greatest astonishment; though there was no particular
reason why he <emph>should</emph> be surprised.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes&mdash;my unalterable&mdash;six-years-standing friend is
dead!&mdash;died yesterday at about mid-day, and I knew nothing
of it! Perhaps he died just when I called there&mdash;who knows?
To-morrow is the funeral! he's in his coffin at this
moment! Died of nervous fever; and they let me
in to see him&mdash;they did indeed!&mdash;to contemplate his
features! I told them I was a great friend&mdash;and therefore
they allowed me in! A pretty trick he has played me&mdash;this
dear friend of six years' standing! why&mdash;perhaps I came
to St. Petersburg <emph>specially for him</emph>!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well&mdash;it's hardly worth your while to be angry with him
about it, is it&mdash;he didn't die on purpose!</q> said Velchaninoff
laughing.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, but I'm speaking out of pure sympathy&mdash;he was a
<emph>dear</emph> friend to me! oh a <emph>very</emph> dear friend!</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch gave a smile of detestable irony and
cunning.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you know what, Alexey Ivanovitch,</q> he resumed,
<q>I think you ought to treat me to something,&mdash;I have often
treated you; I used to be your host every blessed day, sir, at
T&mdash;&mdash;, for a whole year! Send for a bottle of wine, do&mdash;my
throat is so dry!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>With pleasure&mdash;why didn't you say so before! what
would you like?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't say <q>you!</q> say <q>we</q>! we'll drink together of
course!</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch defiantly, but at the same
time looking into Velchaninoff's eyes with some concern.
</p>

<p>
<q>Shall it be champagne?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Of course! it isn't time for vodki yet!</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff rose slowly&mdash;rang the bell and gave Mavra
the necessary orders.
</p>

<p>
<q>We'll drink to this happy meeting of friends after nine
years' parting!</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch, with a very inappropriate
and unnecessary giggle. <q rend='pre'>Why, you are the only
real, true friend left to me now! Bagantoff is no more! it
quite reminds one of the great poet:</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Great Patroclus is no more,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>Mean Thersites liveth yet!</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<q rend='post'>&mdash;and so on,&mdash;don't you know!</q>
</p>

<p>
At the name <q>Thersites</q> Pavel Pavlovitch touched his
own breast.
</p>

<p>
<q>I wish you would speak plainly, you pig of a fellow!</q>
said Velchaninoff to himself, <q>I hate hints!</q> His own anger
was on the rise, and he had long been struggling with his
self-restraint.
</p>

<p>
<q>Look here,&mdash;tell me this, since you consider Bagantoff
to have been guilty before you (as I see you do)
surely you must be glad that your betrayer is dead? What
are you so angry about?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Glad! Why should I be glad?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I judge by what I should imagine your feelings to be.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ha-ha! well, this time you are a little bit in error as to
my feelings, for once! A certain sage has said 'my good
enemy is dead, but I have a still better one alive! ha-ha!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well but you saw him alive for five years at a stretch,&mdash;I
should have thought that was enough to contemplate his
features in!</q> said Velchaninoff angrily and contemptuously.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, but how was I to know then, sir?</q> snapped Pavel
Pavlovitch&mdash;jumping out of an ambush once more, as it were,&mdash;delighted
to be asked a question which he had long
awaited; <q>why, what do you take me for, Alexey Ivanovitch?</q>
at this moment there was in the speaker's face a new expression
altogether, transfiguring entirely the hitherto merely
disagreeably malicious look upon it.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you mean to say you knew nothing of it?</q> said
Velchaninoff in astonishment.
</p>

<p>
<q>How! Didn't know? As if I could have known it
and&mdash;&mdash;Oh, you race of Jupiters! you reckon a man to
be no better than a dog, and judge of him by your own
sentiments. Look here, sir,&mdash;there, look at that.</q> So
saying, he brought his fist madly down upon the table with
a resounding bang, and immediately afterwards looked
frightened at his own act.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff's face beamed.
</p>

<p>
<q>Listen, Pavel Pavlovitch,</q> he said; <q>it is entirely the
same thing to me whether you knew or did not know all
about it. If you did not know, so much the more honourable
is it for you; but&mdash;I can't understand why you should
have selected me for your confidant.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I wasn't talking of you; don't be angry, it wasn't about
you,</q> muttered Pavel Pavlovitch, with his eyes fixed on the
ground.
</p>

<p>
At this moment, Mavra entered with the champagne.
</p>

<p>
<q>Here it is!</q> cried Pavel Pavlovitch, immensely
delighted at the appearance of the wine. <q>Now then,
tumblers my good girl, tumblers quick! Capital! Thank
you, we don't require you any more, my good Mavra.
What! you've drawn the cork? Excellent creature. Well,
ta-ta! off with you.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mavra's advent with the bottle so encouraged him that
he again looked at Velchaninoff with some defiance.
</p>

<p>
<q>Now confess,</q> he giggled suddenly, <q>confess that you
are very curious indeed to hear about all this, and that it
is by no means <q>entirely the same to you,</q> as you declared!
Confess that you would be miserable if I were to get up
and go away this very minute without telling you anything
more.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Not the least in the world, I assure you!</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch smiled; and his smile said, as plainly as
words could, <q>That's a lie!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, let's to business,</q> he said, and poured out two
glasses of champagne.
</p>

<p>
<q>Here's a toast,</q> he continued, raising his goblet, <q>to
the health in Paradise of our dear departed friend
Bagantoff.</q>
</p>

<p>
He raised his glass and drank.
</p>

<p>
<q>I won't drink such a toast as that!</q> said Velchaninoff;
and put his glass down on the table.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why not? It's a very pretty toast.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Look here, were you drunk when you came here?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>A little; why?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh&mdash;nothing particular. Only it appeared to me that
yesterday, and especially this morning, you were sincerely
sorry for the loss of Natalia Vasilievna.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And who says I am not sorry now?</q> cried Pavel Pavlovitch,
as if somebody had pulled a string and made him
snap the words out, like a doll.
</p>

<p>
<q>No, I don't mean that; but you must admit you may
be in error about Bagantoff; and that's a serious matter!</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch grinned and gave a wink.
</p>

<p>
<q>Hey! Wouldn't you just like to know how I found out
about Bagantoff, eh?</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff blushed.
</p>

<p>
<q>I repeat, it's all the same to me,</q> he said; and added
to himself, <q>Hadn't I better pitch him and the bottle out
of the window together.</q> He was blushing more and more
now.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch poured himself out another glass.
</p>

<p>
<q>I'll tell you directly how I found out all about Mr.
Bagantoff, and your burning wish shall be satisfied. For you
are a fiery sort of man, you know, Alexey Ivanovitch, oh,
dreadfully so! Ha-ha-ha. Just give me a cigarette first,
will you, for ever since March&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Here's a cigarette for you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ever since March I have been a depraved man, sir, and
this is how it all came about. Listen. Consumption, as
you know, my dear friend</q> (Pavel Pavlovitch was growing
more and more familiar!), <q>is an interesting malady. One
sees a man dying of consumption without a suspicion that
to-morrow is to be his last day. Well, I told you how
Natalia Vasilievna, up to five hours before her death, talked
about going to visit her aunt, who lived thirty miles or so
away, and starting in a fortnight. You know how some
ladies&mdash;and gentlemen, too, I daresay&mdash;have the bad habit
of keeping a lot of old rubbish by them, in the way of love-letters
and so on. It would be much safer to stick them
all into the fire, wouldn't it? But no, they must keep every
little scrap of paper in drawers and desks, and endorse it
and classify it, and tie it up in bundles, for each year and
month and class! I don't know whether they find this
consoling to their feelings afterwards, or what. Well, since
she was arranging a visit to her aunt just five hours before
her death, Natalia Vasilievna naturally did not expect to
die so soon; in fact, she was expecting old Doctor Koch
down till the last; and so, when Natalia Vasilievna <emph>did</emph> die,
she left behind her a beautiful little black desk all inlaid
with mother-of-pearl, and bound with silver, in her bureau;
oh, a lovely little box, an heirloom left her by her grandmother,
with a lock and key all complete. Well, sir, in
this box everything&mdash;I mean <emph>everything</emph>, you know, for every
day and hour for the last twenty years&mdash;was disclosed; and
since Mr. Bagantoff had a decided taste for literature
(indeed, he had published a passionate novel once, I am
told, in a newspaper!)&mdash;consequently there were about a
hundred examples of his genius in the desk, ranging over
a period of five years. Some of these talented effusions
were covered with pencilled remarks by Natalia Vasilievna
herself! Pleasant, that, for a fond husband's feelings, sir,
eh?</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff quickly cast his thoughts back over the
past, and remembered that he had never written a single
letter or a single note to Natalia Vasilievna.
</p>

<p>
He had written a couple of letters from St. Petersburg,
but, according to a previous arrangement, he had addressed
them to both Mr. and Mrs. Trusotsky together. He had
not answered Natalia Vasilievna's last letter&mdash;which had
contained his dismissal&mdash;at all.
</p>

<p>
Having ended his speech, Pavel Pavlovitch relapsed into
silence, and sat smiling repulsively for a whole minute or so.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why don't you answer my question, my friend?</q> he
asked, at length, evidently disturbed by Velchaninoff's
silence.
</p>

<p>
<q>What question?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>As to the pleasure I must have felt as a fond husband,
upon opening the desk.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Your feelings are no business of mine!</q> said the other
bitterly, rising and commencing to stride up and down the
room.
</p>

<p>
<q>I wouldn't mind betting that you are thinking at this
very moment: <q>What a pig of a fellow he is to parade his
shame like this!</q> Ha-ha! dear me, what a squeamish gentleman
you are to be sure!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Not at all. I was thinking nothing of the sort; on the
contrary, I consider that you are&mdash;besides being more or
less intoxicated&mdash;so put out by the death of the man who
has injured you that you are not yourself. There's nothing
surprising in it at all! I quite understand why you wish
Bagantoff were still alive, and am ready to respect your
annoyance, but&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And pray <emph>why</emph> do you suppose that I wish Bagantoff
were alive?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, that's your affair!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I'll take my oath you are thinking of a duel!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Devil take it, sir!</q> cried Velchaninoff, obliged to hold
himself tighter than ever. <q>I was thinking that you, like
every respectable person in similar circumstances, would act
openly and candidly and straightforwardly, and not humiliate
yourself with comical antics and silly grimaces, and ridiculous
complaints and detestable innuendoes, which only heap
greater shame upon you. I say I was thinking you would
act like a respectable person.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ha-ha-ha!&mdash;but perhaps I am <emph>not</emph> a respectable
person!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, well, that's your own affair again and yet, if
so, what in the devil's name could you want with Bagantoff
alive?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, my dear sir, I should have liked just to have a
nice peep at a dear old friend, that's all. We should have
got hold of a bottle of wine, and drunk it together!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He wouldn't have drunk with <emph>you</emph>!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why not? <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Noblesse oblige?</foreign> Why, <emph>you</emph> are drinking with
me. Wherein is he better than you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have not drunk with you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Wherefore this sudden pride, sir?</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff suddenly burst into a fit of nervous, irritable
laughter.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, deuce take it all!</q> he cried, <q>you are quite a different
type to what I believed. I thought you were nothing
but a <q>permanent husband,</q> but I find you are a sort of bird
of prey.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What! <q>permanent husband?</q> What is a <q>permanent
husband?</q></q> asked Pavel Pavlovitch, pricking up his
ears.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh&mdash;just one type of husbands&mdash;that's all, it's too
long to explain. Come, you'd better get out now; it's quite
time you went. I'm sick of you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And bird of prey, sir; what did that mean?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I said you were a bird of prey for a joke.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes; but&mdash;bird of prey&mdash;tell me what you mean, Alexey
Ivanovitch, for goodness sake!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Come, come, that's quite enough!</q> shouted Velchaninoff,
suddenly flaring up and speaking at the top of his
voice. <q>It's time you went; get out of this, will you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, sir, it's <emph>not</emph> enough!</q> cried Pavel Pavlovitch, jumping
up, too. <q>Even if you <emph>are</emph> sick of me, sir, it's not
enough; for you must first drink and clink glasses with me.
I won't go before you do! No, no; oh dear no! drink first;
it's <emph>not</emph> enough yet.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Pavel Pavlovitch, will you go to the devil or will you
not?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>With pleasure, sir. I'll go to the devil with pleasure;
but first we must drink. You say you don't wish to drink
<emph>with me</emph>; but <emph>I wish you</emph> to drink with me&mdash;actually
<emph>with me</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch was grimacing and giggling no longer.
He seemed to be suddenly transfigured again, and was as
different from the Pavel Pavlovitch of but a few moments
since as he could possibly be, both in appearance and in
the tone of his voice; so much so that Velchaninoff was
absolutely confounded.
</p>

<p>
<q>Come, Alexey Ivanovitch, let's drink!&mdash;don't refuse
me!</q> continued Pavel Pavlovitch, seizing the other tightly
by the hand and gazing into his face with an extraordinary
expression.
</p>

<p>
It was clear there was more in this matter than the mere
question of drinking a glass of wine.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well,</q> muttered Velchaninoff, <q>but that's nothing but
dregs!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, there's just a couple of glasses left&mdash;it's quite clear.
Now then, clink glasses and drink. There, I'll take your
glass and you take mine.</q> They touched glasses and
drank.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, Alexey Ivanovitch! now that we've drunk together&mdash;oh!</q>
Pavel Pavlovitch suddenly raised his hand to his
forehead and sat still for a few moments.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff trembled with excitement. He thought
Pavel Pavlovitch was about to disclose <emph>all</emph>; but Pavel
Pavlovitch said nothing whatever. He only looked at him,
and quietly smiled his detestable cunning smile in the
other's face.
</p>

<p>
<q>What do you want with me, you drunken wretch?</q> cried
Velchaninoff, furious, and stamping his foot upon the floor;
<q>you are making a fool of me!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't shout so&mdash;don't shout! Why make such a noise?</q>
cried Pavel Pavlovitch. <q>I'm not making a fool of you!
Do you know what you are to me now?</q> and he suddenly
seized Velchaninoff's hand, and kissed it before Velchaninoff
could recollect himself.
</p>

<p>
<q>There, that's what you are to me <emph>now</emph>; and now I'll
go to the devil.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Wait a bit&mdash;stop!</q> cried Velchaninoff, recollecting
himself; <q>there's something I wished to say to you.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch turned back from the door.
</p>

<p>
<q>You see,</q> began Velchaninoff, blushing and keeping
his eye well away from the other, <q>you ought to go with
me to the Pogoryeltseffs to-morrow&mdash;just to thank them, you
know, and make their acquaintance.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Of course, of course; quite so!</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch
readily, and making a gesture of the hand to imply that he
knew his duty, and there was no need to remind him of it.
</p>

<p>
<q>Besides Liza expects you anxiously&mdash;I promised her.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Liza?</q> Pavel Pavlovitch turned quickly once more
upon him. <q>Liza? Do you know, sir, what this Liza has
been to me&mdash;has been and is?</q> he cried passionately and
almost beside himself; <q>but&mdash;no!&mdash;afterwards&mdash;that shall
be afterwards! Meanwhile it's not enough for me, Alexey
Ivanovitch, that we have drunk together; there's another
satisfaction I must have, sir!</q> He placed his hat on a
chair, and, panting with excitement, gazed at his companion
with much the same expression as before.
</p>

<p>
<q>Kiss me, Alexey Ivanovitch!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Are you drunk?</q> cried the other, drawing back.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, I am&mdash;but kiss me all the same, Alexey Ivanovitch&mdash;oh,
do! I kissed your hand just now, you know.</q>
</p>

<p>
Alexey Ivanovitch was silent for a few moments, as
though stunned by the blow of a cudgel. Then he quickly
bent down to Pavel Pavlovitch (who was about the height of
his shoulder), and kissed his lips, from which proceeded
a disagreeably powerful odour of wine. He performed the
action as though not quite certain of what he was doing.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well! <emph>now, now!</emph></q> cried Pavel Pavlovitch, with
drunken enthusiasm, and with his eyes flashing fiercely;
<q><emph>now</emph>&mdash;look here&mdash;I'll tell you what! I thought at that
time: <q>Surely not <emph>he</emph>, too! If <emph>this</emph> man,</q> I thought, <q>if <emph>this</emph>
man is guilty too&mdash;then whom am I ever to trust again!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch suddenly burst into tears.
</p>

<p>
<q>So now you must understand <emph>how</emph> dear a friend you are
to me henceforth.</q> With these words he took his hat and
rushed out of the room.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff stood for several minutes in one spot, just
as he had done after Pavel Pavlovitch's first visit.
</p>

<p>
<q>It's merely a drunken sally&mdash;nothing more!</q> he muttered.
<q>Absolutely nothing further!</q> he repeated, when he was
undressed and settled down in his bed.
</p>



</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER VIII.</head>

<p>
Next morning, while waiting for Pavel Pavlovitch, who
had promised to be in good time in order to drive down to
the Pogoryeltseffs with him, Velchaninoff walked up and
down the room, sipped his coffee, and every other minute
reflected upon one and the same idea; namely, that he felt
like a man who had awaked from sleep with the deep impression
of having received a box on the ear the last thing
at night.
</p>

<p>
<q>Hm!</q> he thought, anxiously, <q>he understands the state
of the case only too well; he'll take it out of me by means
of Liza!</q> The dear image of the poor little girl danced
before his eyes. His heart beat quicker when he reflected
that to-day&mdash;in a couple of hours&mdash;he would see <emph>his own</emph> Liza
once more. <q>Yes&mdash;there's no question about it,</q> he said to
himself; <q>my whole end and aim in life is <emph>there</emph> now! What
do I care about all these <q>memories</q> and boxes on the ear;
and what have I lived for up to now?&mdash;for sorrow and
discomfort&mdash;that's all! but <emph>now</emph>, now&mdash;it's all different!</q>
</p>

<p>
But in spite of his ecstatic feelings he grew more and more
thoughtful.
</p>

<p>
<q>He is worrying me for Liza, that's plain; and he bullies
Liza&mdash;he is going to take it out of me that way&mdash;for <emph>all</emph>!
Hm! at all events I cannot possibly allow such sallies as his
of last night,</q> and Velchaninoff blushed hotly <q>and here's half-past
eleven and he hasn't come yet.</q> He waited long&mdash;till
half-past twelve, and his anguish of impatience grew more
and more keen. Pavel Pavlovitch did not appear. At
length the idea began to take shape that Pavel Pavlovitch
naturally would not come again for the sole purpose of
another scene like that of last night. The thought filled
Velchaninoff with despair. <q>The brute knows I am depending
upon him&mdash;and what on earth am I to do now about Liza?
How can I make my appearance without him?</q>
</p>

<p>
At last he could bear it no longer and set off to the
Pokrofsky at one o'clock to look for Pavel Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
At the lodging, Velchaninoff was informed that Pavel
Pavlovitch had not been at home all night, and had only
called in at nine o'clock, stayed a quarter of an hour, and
had gone out again.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff stood at the door listening to the servants'
report, mechanically tried the handle, recollected
himself, and asked to see Maria Sisevna.
</p>

<p>
The latter obeyed his summons at once.
</p>

<p>
She was a kind-hearted old creature, of generous feelings,
as Velchaninoff described her afterwards to Claudia
Petrovna. Having first enquired as to his journey yesterday
with Liza, Maria launched into anecdotes of Pavel
Pavlovitch. She declared that she would long ago have
turned her lodger out neck and crop, but for the child.
Pavel Pavlovitch had been turned out of the hotel for
generally disreputable behaviour. <q>Oh, he does dreadful
things!</q> she continued. <q>Fancy his telling the poor child,
in anger, that she wasn't his daughter, but&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh no, no! impossible!</q> cried Velchaninoff in alarm.
</p>

<p>
<q>I heard it myself! She's only a small child, of course, but
that sort of thing doesn't do before an intelligent child like
her! She cried dreadfully&mdash;she was quite upset. We had a
catastrophe in the house a short while since. Some commissionnaire
or somebody took a room in the evening, and
hung himself before morning. He had bolted with money,
they say. Well, crowds of people came in to stare at him.
Pavel Pavlovitch wasn't at home, but the child had escaped
and was wandering about; and she must needs go with the
rest to see the sight. I saw her looking at the suicide with an
extraordinary expression, and carried her off at once, of course;
and fancy, I hardly managed to get home with her&mdash;trembling
all over she was&mdash;when off she goes in a dead faint, and
it was all I could do to bring her round at all. I don't
know whether she's epileptic or what&mdash;and ever since that she
has been ill. When her father heard, he came and pinched
her all over&mdash;he doesn't beat her; he always pinches her
like that,&mdash;then he went out and got drunk somewhere, and
came back and frightened her. <q>I'm going to hang myself
too,</q> he says, <q>because of you. I shall hang myself on that
blind string there,</q> he says, and he makes a loop in the
string before her very eyes. The poor little thing went quite
out of her mind with terror, and cried and clasped him round
with her little arms. <q>I'll be good&mdash;I'll be good!</q> she shrieks.
It was a pitiful sight&mdash;it was, indeed!</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff, though prepared for strange revelations
concerning Pavel Pavlovitch and his ways, was quite dumbfounded
by these tales; he could scarcely believe his ears.
</p>

<p>
Maria Sisevna told him many more such little anecdotes.
Among others, there was one occasion, when, if she (Maria)
had not been by, Liza would have thrown herself out of the
window.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch had come staggering out of the room
muttering, <q>I shall smash her head in with a stick! I shall
murder her like a dog!</q> and he had gone away, repeating
this over and over again to himself.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff hired a carriage and set off towards the
Pogoryeltseffs. Before he had left the town behind him, the
carriage was delayed by a block at a cross road, just by a small
bridge, over which was passing, at the moment, a long funeral
procession. There were carriages waiting to move on on both
sides of the bridge, and a considerable crowd of foot passengers
besides.
</p>

<p>
The funeral was evidently of some person of considerable
importance, for the train of private and hired vehicles was
a very long one; and at the window of one of these carriages
in the procession Velchaninoff suddenly beheld the face of
Pavel Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff would not have believed his eyes, but that
Pavel Pavlovitch nodded his head and smiled to him. He
seemed to be delighted to have recognised Velchaninoff;
he even began to kiss his hand out of the window.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff jumped out of his own vehicle, and in spite
of policemen, crowd, and everything else, elbowed his way
to Pavel Pavlovitch's carriage window. He found the latter
sitting alone.
</p>

<p>
<q>What are you doing?</q> he cried. <q>Why didn't you
come to my house? Why are you here?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I'm paying a debt; don't shout so! I'm repaying a
debt,</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch, giggling and winking. <q>I'm
escorting the mortal remains of my dear friend Stepan
Michailovitch Bagantoff!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What absurdity, you drunken, insane creature,</q> cried
Velchaninoff louder than ever, and beside himself with outraged
feeling. <q>Get out and come with me. Quick! get
out instantly!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I can't. It's a debt&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I'll pull you out, then!</q> shouted Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>Then I'll scream, sir, I'll scream!</q> giggled Pavel Pavlovitch,
as merrily as ever, just as though the whole thing
was a joke. However, he retreated into the further corner
of the carriage, all the same.
</p>

<p>
<q>Look out, sir, look out! You'll be knocked down!</q>
cried a policeman.
</p>

<p>
Sure enough, an outside carriage was making its way
on to the bridge from the side, stopping the procession, and
causing a commotion. Velchaninoff was obliged to spring
aside, and the press of carriages and people immediately
separated him from Pavel Pavlovitch. He shrugged his
shoulders and returned to his own vehicle.
</p>

<p>
<q>It's all the same. I couldn't take such a fellow with
me, anyhow,</q> he reflected, still all of a tremble with excitement
and the rage of disgust. When he repeated Maria
Sisevna's story, and his meeting at the funeral, to Claudia
Petrovna afterwards, the latter became buried in deep thought.
</p>

<p>
<q>I am anxious for you,</q> she said at last. <q>You must
break off all relations with that man, and as soon as
possible.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, he's nothing but a drunken fool!</q> cried Velchaninoff
passionately; <q>as if I am to be afraid of <emph>him</emph>! And
how can I break off relations with him? Remember
Liza!</q>
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile Liza was lying ill; fever had set in last night,
and an eminent doctor was momentarily expected from
town! He had been sent for early this morning.
</p>

<p>
These news quite upset Velchaninoff. Claudia Petrovna
took him in to see the patient.
</p>

<p>
<q>I observed her very carefully yesterday,</q> she said,
stopping at the door of Liza's room before entering it.
<q>She is a proud and morose child. She is ashamed of being
with us, and of having been thrown over by her father. In
my opinion that is the whole secret of her illness.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How <q>thrown over</q>? Why do you suppose that he
has thrown her over?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The simple fact that he allowed her to come here to
a strange house, and with a man who was also a stranger,
or nearly so; or, at all events, with whom his relations were
such that&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, but I took her myself, almost by force.</q>
</p>

<p>
Liza was not surprised to see Velchaninoff alone. She
only smiled bitterly, and turned her hot face to the wall.
She made no reply to his passionate promises to bring her
father down to-morrow without fail, or to his timid attempts
at consolation.
</p>

<p>
As soon as Velchaninoff left the sick child's presence, he
burst into tears.
</p>

<p>
The doctor did not arrive until evening. On seeing the
patient he frightened everybody by his very first remark,
observing that it was a pity he had not been sent for before.
</p>

<p>
When informed that the child had only been taken ill
last night, he could not believe it at first.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, it all depends upon how this night is passed,</q> he
decided at last.
</p>

<p>
Having made all necessary arrangements, he took his
departure, promising to come as early as possible next
morning.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff was anxious to stay the night, but Claudia
Petrovna begged him to try once more <q>to bring down that
brute of a man.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Try once more!</q> cried Velchaninoff, passionately;
<q>why, I'll tie him hand and foot and bring him along myself!</q>
</p>

<p>
The idea that he would tie Pavel Pavlovitch up and
carry him down in his arms overpowered Velchaninoff, and
filled him with impatience to execute his frantic desire.
</p>

<p>
<q>I don't feel the slightest bit guilty before him any
more,</q> he said to Claudia Petrovna, at parting, <q>and I withdraw
all my servile, abject words of yesterday&mdash;all I said
to you,</q> he added, wrathfully.
</p>

<p>
Liza lay with closed eyes, apparently asleep; she seemed
to be better. When Velchaninoff bent cautiously over her
in order to kiss&mdash;if it were but the edge of her bed linen&mdash;she
suddenly opened her eyes, just as though she had been
waiting for him, and whispered, <q>Take me away!</q>
</p>

<p>
It was but a quiet, sad petition&mdash;without a trace of yesterday's
irritation; but at the same time there was that in
her voice which betrayed that she made the request in the
full knowledge that it could not be assented to.
</p>

<p>
No sooner did Velchaninoff, in despair, begin to assure
her as tenderly as he could that what she desired was impossible,
than she silently closed her eyes and said not another
word, just as though she neither saw nor heard him.
</p>

<p>
Arrived in town Velchaninoff told his man to drive him to
the Pokrofsky. It was ten o'clock at night.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch was not at his lodgings. Velchaninoff
waited for him half an hour, walking up and down the
passage in a state of feverish impatience. Maria Sisevna
assured him at last that Pavel Pavlovitch would not come
in until the small hours.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, then, I'll return here before daylight,</q> he said,
beside himself with desperation, and he went home to his
own rooms.
</p>

<p>
What was his amazement, when, on arriving at the gate
of his house, he learned from Mavra that <q>yesterday's
visitor</q> had been waiting for him ever since before ten
o'clock.
</p>

<p>
<q>He's had some tea,</q> she added, <q>and sent me for
wine again&mdash;the same wine as yesterday. He gave me the
money to buy it with.</q>
</p>



</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER IX.</head>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch had made himself very comfortable.
He was sitting in the same chair as he had occupied yesterday,
smoking a cigar, and had just poured the fourth and
last tumbler of champagne out of the bottle.
</p>

<p>
The teapot and a half-emptied tumbler of tea stood on
the table beside him; his red face beamed with benevolence.
He had taken off his coat, and sat in his shirt
sleeves.
</p>

<p>
<q>Forgive me, dearest of friends,</q> he cried, catching
sight of Velchaninoff, and hastening to put on his coat, <q>I
took it off to make myself thoroughly comfortable.</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff approached him menacingly.
</p>

<p>
<q>You are not quite tipsy yet, are you? Can you understand
what is said to you?</q>
</p>

<p>
Paul Pavlovitch became a little confused.
</p>

<p>
<q>No, not quite. I've been thinking of the dear
deceased a bit, but I'm not quite drunk yet.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Can you understand what I say?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>My dear sir, I came here on purpose to understand
you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well, then I shall begin at once by telling you
that you are an ass, sir!</q> cried Velchaninoff, at the top of
his voice.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, if you begin that way where will you end, I
wonder!</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch, clearly alarmed more than
a little.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff did not listen, but roared again,
</p>

<p>
<q>Your daughter is dying&mdash;she is very ill! Have you
thrown her over altogether, or not?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, surely she isn't dying yet?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I tell you she's ill; very, very ill&mdash;dangerously ill.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What, fits? or&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't talk nonsense. I tell you she is very dangerously
ill. You ought to go down, if only for that reason.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What, to thank your friends, eh? to return thanks for
their hospitality? Of course, quite so; I well understand,
Alexey Ivanovitch&mdash;dearest of friends!</q> He suddenly
seized Velchaninoff by both hands, and added with
intoxicated sentiment, almost melted to tears, <q>Alexey
Ivanovitch, don't shout at me&mdash;don't shout at me, please!
If you do, I may throw myself into the Neva&mdash;I don't
know!&mdash;and we have such important things to talk over.
There's lots of time to go to the Pogoryeltseffs another
day.</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff did his best to restrain his wrath. <q>You
are drunk, and therefore I don't understand what you are
driving at,</q> he said sternly. <q>I'm ready to come to an
explanation with you at any moment you like&mdash;delighted!&mdash;the
the sooner the better. But first let me tell you that I am
going to take my own measures to secure you. You will
sleep here to-night, and to-morrow I shall take you with me
to see Liza. I shall not let you go again. I shall bind you,
if necessary, and carry you down myself. How do you
like this sofa to sleep on?</q> he added, panting, and indicating
a wide, soft divan opposite his own sofa, against the
other wall.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh&mdash;anything will do for me!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well, you shall have this sofa. Here, take these
things&mdash;here are sheets, blankets, pillow</q> (Velchaninoff
pulled all these things out of a cupboard, and tossed them
impatiently to Pavel Pavlovitch, who humbly stood and received
them); <q>now then, make your bed,&mdash;come, bustle
up!</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch laden with bed clothes had been standing
in the middle of the room with a stupid drunken leer on
his face, irresolute; but at Velchaninoff's second bidding
he hurriedly began the task of making his bed, moving the
table away from in front of it, and smoothing a sheet over
the seat of the divan. Velchaninoff approached to help
him. He was more or less gratified with his guest's alarm
and submission.
</p>

<p>
<q>Now, drink up that wine and lie down!</q> was his next
command. He felt that he <emph>must</emph> order this man about, he
could not help himself. <q>I suppose you took upon yourself
to order this wine, did you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I did&mdash;I did, sir! I sent for the wine, Alexey
Ivanovitch, because I knew <emph>you</emph> would not send out
again!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, it's a good thing that you knew that; but I
desire that you should know still more. I give you notice
that I have taken my own measures for the future, I'm not
going to put up with any more of your antics.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, I quite understand, Alexey Ivanovitch, that that
sort of thing could only happen once!</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch,
giggling feebly.
</p>

<p>
At this reply Velchaninoff, who had been marching up
and down the room stopped solemnly before Pavel Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
<q>Pavel Pavlovitch,</q> he said, <q>speak plainly! You are
a clever fellow&mdash;I admit the fact freely,&mdash;but I assure you you
are going on a false track now. Speak plainly, and act like
an honest man, and I give you my word of honour that I
will answer all you wish to know.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch grinned his disagreeable grin (which
always drove Velchaninoff wild) once more.
</p>

<p>
<q>Wait!</q> cried the latter. <q>No humbug now, please; I
see through you. I repeat that I give you my word of
honour to reply candidly to anything you may like to ask,
and to give you every sort of satisfaction&mdash;reasonable or
even unreasonable&mdash;that you please. <emph>Oh!</emph> how I wish I
could make you understand me!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Since you are so very kind,</q> began Pavel Pavlovitch,
cautiously bending towards him, <q>I may tell you that I
am very much interested as to what you said yesterday
about <q>bird of prey</q>?</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff spat on the ground in utter despair
and disgust, and recommenced his walk up and down the
room, quicker than ever.
</p>

<p>
<q>No, no, Alexey Ivanovitch, don't spurn my question;
you don't know how interested I am in it. I assure you I
came here on purpose to ask you about it. I know I'm
speaking indistinctly, but you'll forgive me that. I've read
the expression before. Tell me now, was Bagantoff a <q>bird
of prey,</q> or&mdash;the other thing? How is one to distinguish one
from the other?</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff went on walking up and down, and answered
nothing for some minutes.
</p>

<p>
<q>The bird of prey, sir,</q> he began suddenly, stopping in
front of Pavel Pavlovitch, and speaking vehemently, <q>is the
man who would poison Bagantoff while drinking champagne
with him under the cloak of goodfellowship, as you did with me
yesterday, instead of escorting his wretched body to the
burial ground as you did&mdash;the deuce only knows why, and with
what dirty, mean, underhand, petty motives, which only
recoil upon yourself and make you viler than you already
are. Yes, sir, recoil upon yourself!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite so, quite so, I oughtn't to have gone,</q> assented
Pavel Pavlovitch, <q>but aren't you a little&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The bird of prey is not a man who goes and learns his
grievance off by heart, like a lesson, and whines it about
the place, grimacing and posing, and hanging it round
other people's necks, and who spends all his time in such
pettifogging. Is it true you wanted to hang yourself?
Come, is it true, or not?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I&mdash;I don't know&mdash;I may have when I was drunk&mdash;I
don't remember. You see, Alexey Ivanovitch, it wouldn't
be quite nice for me to go poisoning people. I'm too
high up in the service, and I have money, too, you know&mdash;and
I may wish to marry again, who knows.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes; you'd be sent to Siberia, which would be
awkward.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite so; though they say the penal servitude is not so
bad as it was. But you remind me of an anecdote, Alexey
Ivanovitch. I thought of it in the carriage, and meant to
tell you afterwards. Well! you may remember Liftsoff at
T&mdash;&mdash;. He came while you were there. His younger
brother&mdash;who is rather a swell, too&mdash;was serving at L&mdash;&mdash;
under the governor, and one fine day he happened to
quarrel with Colonel Golubenko in the presence of ladies,
and of one lady especially. Liftsoff considered himself insulted,
but concealed his grievance; and, meanwhile,
Golubenko proposed to a certain lady and was accepted.
Would you believe it, Liftsoff made great friends with
Golubenko, and even volunteered to be best man at his
wedding. But when the ceremony was all over, and Liftsoff
approached the bridegroom to wish him joy and kiss him,
as usual, he took the opportunity of sticking a knife into
Golubenko. Fancy! his own best man stuck him! Well,
what does the assassin do but run about the room
crying. <q>Oh! what have I done? Oh! what have I done?</q>
says he, and throws himself on everyone's neck by turns,
ladies and all! Ha-ha-ha! He starved to death in Siberia,
sir! One is a little sorry for Golubenko; but he recovered,
after all.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I don't understand why you told me that story,</q> said
Velchaninoff, frowning heavily.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, because he stuck the other fellow with a knife,</q> giggled
Pavel Pavlovitch, <q>which proves that he was no type,
but an ass of a fellow, who could so forget the ordinary
manners of society as to hang around ladies' necks, and in
the presence of the governor, too&mdash;and yet he stuck the
other fellow. Ha-ha-ha! He did what he intended to do,
that's all, sir!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Go to the devil, will you&mdash;you and your miserable
humbug&mdash;you miserable humbug yourself,</q> yelled Velchaninoff,
wild with rage and fury, and panting so that he could
hardly get his words out. <q>You think you are going to
alarm <emph>me</emph>, do you, you frightener of children&mdash;you mean
beast&mdash;you low scoundrel you?&mdash;scoundrel&mdash;scoundrel&mdash;scoundrel!</q>
He had quite forgotten himself in his rage.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch shuddered all over; his drunkenness
seemed to vanish in an instant; his lips trembled and
shook.
</p>

<p>
<q>Are you calling <emph>me</emph> a scoundrel, Alexey Ivanovitch&mdash;<emph>you</emph>&mdash;<emph>me</emph>?</q>
</p>

<p>
But Velchaninoff was himself again now.
</p>

<p>
<q>I'll apologise if you like,</q> he said, and relapsed into
gloomy silence. After a moment he added, <q>But only on
condition that you yourself agree to speak out fully, and
at once.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In your place I should apologise unconditionally, Alexey
Ivanovitch.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well; so be it then.</q> Velchaninoff was silent
again for a while. <q>I apologise,</q> he resumed; <q>but
admit yourself, Pavel Pavlovitch, that I need not feel myself
in any way bound to you after this. I mean with regard
to <emph>anything</emph>&mdash;not only this particular matter.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>All right! Why, what is there to settle between us?</q>
laughed Pavel Pavlovitch, without looking up.
</p>

<p>
<q>In that case, so much the better&mdash;so much the better.
Come, drink up your wine and get into bed, for I shall not
let you go now, anyhow.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, my wine&mdash;never mind my wine!</q> muttered Pavel
Pavlovitch; but he went to the table all the same, and
took up his tumbler of champagne which had long been
poured out. Either he had been drinking copiously before,
or there was some other unknown cause at work, but his
hand shook so as he drank the wine that a quantity of it
was spilled over his waistcoat and the floor. However, he
drank it all, to the last drop, as though he could not leave
the tumbler without emptying it. He then placed the
empty glass on the table, approached his bed, sat down on
it, and began to undress.
</p>

<p>
<q>I think perhaps I had better <emph>not</emph> sleep here,</q> he said
suddenly, with one boot off, and half undressed.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, I <emph>don't</emph> think so,</q> said Velchaninoff, who was
walking up and down, without looking at him.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch finished undressing and lay down. A
quarter of an hour later Velchaninoff also got into bed, and
put the candle out.
</p>

<p>
He soon began to doze uncomfortably. Some new
trouble seemed to have suddenly come over him and
worried him, and at the same time he felt a sensation of
shame that he could allow himself to be worried by
the new trouble. Velchaninoff was just falling definitely
asleep, however, when a rustling sound awoke him. He
immediately glanced at Pavel Pavlovitch's bed. The room
was quite dark, the blinds being down and curtains drawn;
but it seemed to him that Pavel Pavlovitch was not lying in
his bed; he seemed to be sitting on the side of it.
</p>

<p>
<q>What's the matter?</q> cried Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>A ghost, sir,</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch, in a low tone, after
a few moments of silence.
</p>

<p>
<q>What? What sort of a ghost?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Th&mdash;there&mdash;in that room&mdash;just at the door, I seemed
to see a ghost!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Whose ghost?</q> asked Velchaninoff, pausing a minute
before putting the question.
</p>

<p>
<q>Natalia Vasilievna's!</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff jumped out of bed and walked to the door,
whence he could see into the room opposite, across the
passage. There were no curtains in that room, so that it
was much lighter than his own.
</p>

<p>
<q>There's nothing there at all. You are drunk; lie down
again!</q> he said, and himself set the example, rolling his
blanket around him.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch said nothing, but lay down as he was
told.
</p>

<p>
<q>Did you ever see any ghosts before?</q> asked Velchaninoff
suddenly, ten minutes later.
</p>

<p>
<q>I think I saw one once,</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch in the
same low voice; after which there was silence once more.
Velchaninoff was not sure whether he had been asleep or
not, but an hour or so had passed, when suddenly he was
wide awake again. Was it a rustle that awoke him? He
could not tell; but one thing was evident&mdash;in the midst of
the profound darkness of the room something white stood
before him; not quite close to him, but about the middle
of the room. He sat up in bed, and stared for a full
minute.
</p>

<p>
<q>Is that you, Pavel Pavlovitch?</q> he asked. His voice
sounded very weak.
</p>

<p>
There was no reply; but there was not the slightest
doubt of the fact that someone was standing there.
</p>

<p>
<q>Is that you, Pavel Pavlovitch?</q> cried Velchaninoff
again, louder this time; in fact, so loud that if the former
had been asleep in bed he must have started up and
answered.
</p>

<p>
But there was no reply again. It seemed to Velchaninoff
that the white figure had approached nearer to him.
</p>

<p>
Then something strange happened; something seemed
to <q>let go</q> within Velchaninoff's system, and he commenced
to shout at the top of his voice, just as he had done once
before this evening, in the wildest and maddest way
possible, panting so that he could hardly articulate his
words: <q>If you&mdash;drunken ass that you are&mdash;dare to think
that you could frighten <emph>me</emph>, I'll turn my face to the wall,
and not look round once the whole night, to show you how
little I am afraid of you&mdash;a fool like you&mdash;if you stand there
from now till morning! I despise you!</q> So saying,
Velchaninoff twisted round with his face to the wall, rolled
his blanket round him, and lay motionless, as though
turned to stone. A deathlike stillness supervened.
</p>

<p>
Did the ghost stand where it was, or had it moved? He
could not tell; but his heart beat, and beat, and beat&mdash;At
least five minutes went by, and then, not a couple of
paces from his bed, there came the feeble voice of Pavel
Pavlovitch:
</p>

<p>
<q>I got up, Alexey Ivanovitch, to look for a little water.
I couldn't find any, and was just going to look about nearer
your bed&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Then why didn't you answer when I called?</q> cried
Velchaninoff angrily, after a minute's pause.
</p>

<p>
<q>I was frightened; you shouted so, you alarmed me!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You'll find a caraffe and glass over there, on the little
table. Light a candle.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, I'll find it without. You'll forgive me, Alexey
Ivanovitch, for frightening you so; I felt thirsty so
suddenly.</q>
</p>

<p>
But Velchaninoff said nothing. He continued to lie with
his face to the wall, and so he lay all night, without turning
round once. Was he anxious to keep his word and show
his contempt for Pavel Pavlovitch? He did not know
himself why he did it; his nervous agitation and perturbation
were such that he could not sleep for a long while, he felt
quite delirious. At last he fell asleep, and awoke at past
nine o'clock next morning. He started up just as though
someone had struck him, and sat down on the side of his
bed. But Pavel Pavlovitch was not to be seen. His
empty, rumpled bed was there, but its occupant had flown
before daybreak.
</p>

<p>
<q>I thought so!</q> cried Velchaninoff, bringing the palm
of his right hand smartly to his forehead.
</p>



</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER X.</head>

<p>
The doctor's anxiety was justified; Liza grew worse, so
much so that it was clear she was far more seriously ill
than Velchaninoff and Claudia Petrovna had thought the
day before.
</p>

<p>
When the former arrived in the morning, Liza was still
conscious, though burning with fever. He assured his
friend Claudia, afterwards, that the child had smiled at him
and held out her little hot hand. Whether she actually did
so, or whether he so much longed for her to do so that he
imagined it done, is uncertain.
</p>

<p>
By the evening, however, Liza was quite unconscious,
and so she remained during the whole of her illness. Ten
days after her removal to the country she died.
</p>

<p>
This was a sad period for Velchaninoff; the Pogoryeltseffs
were quite anxious on his account. He was with them for
the greater part of the time, and during the last few days of
the little one's illness, he used to sit all alone for hours
together in some corner, apparently thinking of nothing.
Claudia Petrovna would attempt to distract him but he
hardly answered her, and conversation was clearly painful
to him. Claudia was quite surprised that <q>all this</q> should
affect him so deeply.
</p>

<p>
The children were the best consolation and distraction
for him; with them he could even laugh and play at intervals.
Every hour, at least, he would rise from his chair
and creep on tip-toes to the sick-room to look at the little
invalid. Sometimes he imagined that she knew him; he
had no hope for her recovery&mdash;none of the family had any
hope; but he never left the precincts of the child's chamber,
sitting principally in the next room.
</p>

<p>
Twice, however, he had evinced great activity of a
sudden; he had jumped up and started off for town, where
he had called upon all the most eminent doctors of the
place, and arranged consultations between them. The last
consultation was on the day before Liza's death.
</p>

<p>
Claudia Petrovna had spoken seriously to him a day or
two since, as to the absolute necessity of hunting up Pavel
Pavlovitch Trusotsky, because in case of anything happening
to Liza, she could not be buried without certain documents
from him.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff promised to write to him, and did write a
couple of lines, which he took to the Pokrofsky. Pavel
Pavlovitch was not at home, as usual, but he left the letter
to the care of Maria Sisevna.
</p>

<p>
At last Liza died&mdash;on a lovely summer evening, just as
the sun was setting; and only then did Velchaninoff rouse
himself.
</p>

<p>
When the little one was laid out, all covered with
flowers, and dressed in a fair white frock belonging to one
of Claudia Petrovna's children, Velchaninoff came up to
the lady of the house, and told her with flashing eyes that
he would now go and fetch the murderer. Regardless of
all advice to put off his search until to-morrow he started
for town immediately.
</p>

<p>
He knew where to find Pavel Pavlovitch. He had not
been in town exclusively to find the doctors those two days.
Occasionally, while watching the dying child, he had been
struck with the idea that if he could only find and bring
down Pavel Pavlovitch she might hear his voice and be
called back, as it were, from the darkness of delirium; at
such moments he had been seized with desperation, and
twice he had started up and driven wildly off to town in
order to find Pavel Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
The latter's room was the same as before, but it was
useless to look for him there, for, according to Maria
Sisevna's report, he was now two or three days absent from
home at a stretch, and was generally to be found with some
friends in the Voznecensky.
</p>

<p>
Arrived in town about ten o'clock, Velchaninoff went
straight to these latter people, and securing the services of
a member of the family to assist in finding Pavel Pavlovitch,
set out on his quest. He did not know what he should do
with Pavel Pavlovitch when found, whether he should kill
him then and there, or simply inform him of the death of
the child, and of the necessity for his assistance in arranging
for her funeral. After a long and fruitless search
Velchaninoff found Pavel Pavlovitch quite accidentally; he
was quarrelling with some person in the street&mdash;tipsy as
usual, and seemed to be getting the worst of the controversy,
which appeared to be about a money claim.
</p>

<p>
On catching sight of Velchaninoff, Pavel Pavlovitch
stretched out his arms to him and begged for help; while
his opponent&mdash;observing Velchaninoff's athletic figure&mdash;made
off. Pavel Pavlovitch shook his fist after him
triumphantly, and hooted at him with cries of victory; but
this amusement was brought to a sudden conclusion by
Velchaninoff, who, impelled by some mysterious motive&mdash;which
he could not analyse, took him by the shoulders,
and began to shake him violently, so violently that his
teeth chattered.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch ceased to shout after his opponent, and
gazed with a stupid tipsy expression of alarm at his new
antagonist. Velchaninoff, having shaken him till he was
tired, and not knowing what to do next with him, set him
down violently on the pavement, backwards.
</p>

<p>
<q>Liza is dead!</q> he said.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch sat on the pavement and stared, he was
too far gone to take in the news. At last he seemed to
realize.
</p>

<p>
<q>Dead!</q> he whispered, in a strange inexplicable tone.
Velchaninoff was not sure whether his face was simply
twitching, or whether he was trying to grin in his usual disagreeable
way; but the next moment the drunkard raised
his shaking hand to cross himself. He then struggled to
his feet and staggered off, appearing totally oblivious of the
fact that such a person as Velchaninoff existed.
</p>

<p>
However, the latter very soon pursued and caught him,
seizing him once more by the shoulder.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you understand, you drunken sot, that without you
the funeral arrangements cannot be made?</q> he shouted,
panting with rage.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch turned his head.
</p>

<p>
<q>The artillery&mdash;lieutenant&mdash;don't you remember him?</q>
he muttered, thickly.
</p>

<p>
<q><emph>What?</emph></q> cried Velchaninoff, with a shudder.
</p>

<p>
<q>He's her father&mdash;find him! he'll bury her!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You liar! You said that out of pure malice. I thought
you'd invent something of the sort!</q>
</p>

<p>
Quite beside himself with passion Velchaninoff brought
down his powerful fist with all his strength on Pavel Pavlovitch's
head; another moment and he might have followed
up the blow and slain the man as he stood. His victim never
winced, but he turned upon Velchaninoff a face of such
insane terrible passion, that his whole visage looked distorted.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you understand Russian?</q> he asked more firmly,
as though his fury had chased away the effects of drunkenness.
<q>Very well, then, you are a&mdash;&mdash;!</q> (here followed a
specimen of the very vilest language which the Russian
tongue could furnish); <q>and now you can go back to her!</q>
So saying he tore himself from Velchaninoff's grasp, nearly
knocking himself over with the effort, and staggered away.
Velchaninoff did not follow him.
</p>

<p>
Next day, however, a most respectable-looking middle-aged
man arrived at the Pogoryeltseft's house, in civil uniform,
and handed to Claudia Petrovna a packet addressed
to her <q>from Pavel Pavlovitch Trusotsky.</q>
</p>

<p>
In this packet was a sum of three hundred roubles, together
with all certificates necessary for Liza's funeral.
Pavel Pavlovitch had written a short note couched in very
polite and correct phraseology, and thanking Claudia
Petrovna sincerely <q>for her great kindness to the orphan&mdash;kindness
for which heaven alone could recompense her.</q>
He added rather confusedly that severe illness prevented
his personal presence at the funeral of his <q>tenderly loved
and unfortunate daughter,</q> but that he <q>felt he could repose
all confidence (as to the ceremony being fittingly performed)
in the angelic goodness of Claudia Petrovna.</q> The three
hundred roubles, he explained, were to go towards the
funeral and other expenses. If there should be any of the
money left after defraying all charges, Claudia Petrovna
was requested to spend the same in prayers for the repose
of the soul of the deceased.
</p>

<p>
Nothing further was to be discovered by questioning the
messenger; and it was soon evident that the latter knew
nothing, excepting that he had only consented to act as
bearer of the packet, in response to the urgent appeal of
Pavel Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
Pogoryeltseff was a little offended by the offer of money
for expenses, and would have sent it back, but Claudia
Petrovna suggested that a receipt should be taken from the
cemetery authorities for the cost of the funeral (since one
could not well refuse to allow a man to bury his own child),
together with a document undertaking that the rest of the
three hundred roubles should be spent in prayer for the
soul of Liza.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff afterwards posted an envelope containing
these two papers to Trusotsky's lodging.
</p>

<p>
After the funeral Velchaninoff disappeared from the country
altogether. He wandered about town for a whole fortnight,
knocking up against people as he went blindly through
the streets. Now and then he spent a whole day lying in
his bed, oblivious of the most ordinary needs and occupations;
the Pogoryeltseffs often invited him to their house,
and he invariably promised to come, and as invariably forgot
all about it. Claudia Petrovna went as far as to call
for him herself, but she did not find him at home. The
same thing happened with his lawyer, who had some good
news to tell him. The difference with his opponent had been
settled advantageously for Velchaninoff, the former having
accepted a small bonification and renounced his claim to
the property in dispute. All that was wanting was the formal
acquiescence of Velchaninoff himself.
</p>

<p>
Finding him at home at last, after many endeavours, the
lawyer was excessively surprised to discover that Velchaninoff
was as callous and cool as to the result of his (the lawyer's)
labours, as he had before been ardent and excitable.
</p>

<p>
The hottest days of July had now arrived, but Velchaninoff
was oblivious of everything. His grief swelled and ached
at his heart like some internal boil; his greatest sorrow
was that Liza had not had time to know him, and died
without ever guessing how fondly he loved her. The
sweet new beacon of his life, which had glimmered for a short
while within his heart, was extinguished once more, and
lost in eternal gloom.
</p>

<p>
The whole object of his existence, as he now told himself
at every moment, should have been that Liza might feel his
love about her and around her, each day, each hour, each
moment of her life.
</p>

<p>
<q>There can be no higher aim or object than this in
life,</q> he thought, in gloomy ecstasy. <q>If there be other
aims in life, none can be holier or better than this of mine.
All my old unworthy life should have been purified and
atoned for by my love for Liza; in place of myself&mdash;my
sinful, worn-out, useless life&mdash;I should have bequeathed to the
world a sweet, pure, beautiful being, in whose innocence all
my guilt should have been absorbed, and lost, and forgiven,
and in her I should have forgiven myself.</q>
</p>

<p>
Such thoughts would flit through Velchaninoff's head
as he mused sorrowfully over the memory of the dead
child. He thought over all he had seen of her; he
recalled her little face all burning with fever, then lying
at rest in her coffin, covered with lovely flowers. He
remembered that once he had noticed that one of her
fingers was quite black from some bruise or pinch&mdash;goodness
knows what had made it so, but it was the sight
of that little finger which had filled him with longing to go
straight away and <emph>murder</emph> Pavel Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you know what Liza is to me?</q> Pavel had said,
he recollected, one day; and now he understood the exclamation.
It was no pretence of love, no posturing and
nonsense&mdash;it was real love! How, then, could the wretch
have been so cruel to a child whom he so dearly loved?
He could not bear to think of it, the question was painful,
and quite unanswerable.
</p>

<p>
One day he wandered down&mdash;he knew not exactly how&mdash;to
the cemetery where Liza was buried, and hunted up her
grave. This was the first time he had been there since the
funeral; he had never dared to go there before, fearing
that the visit would be too painful. But strangely enough,
when he found the little mound and had bent down and
kissed it, he felt happier and lighter at heart than before.
</p>

<p>
It was a lovely evening, the sun was setting, the tall grass
waved about the tombs, and a bee hummed somewhere
near him. The flowers and crosses placed on the tomb by
Claudia Petrovna were still there. A ray of hope blazed
up in his heart for the first time for many a long day. <q>How
light-hearted I feel,</q> he thought, as he felt the spell of the
quiet of God's Acre, and the hush of the beautiful still
evening. A flow of some indefinable faith in something
poured into his heart.
</p>

<p>
<q>This is Liza's gift,</q> he thought; <q>this is Liza herself
talking to me!</q>
</p>

<p>
It was quite dark when he left the cemetery and turned
his steps homewards.
</p>

<p>
Not far from the gate of the burial ground there stood a
small inn or public-house, and through the open windows
he could see the people inside sitting at tables. It instantly
struck Velchaninoff that one of the guests, sitting
nearest to the window, was Pavel Pavlovitch, and that the
latter had seen him and was observing him curiously.
</p>

<p>
He went on further, but before very long he heard footsteps
pursuing him. It was, of course, Pavel Pavlovitch. Probably
the unusually serene and peaceful expression of
Velchaninoff's face as he went by had attracted and
encouraged him.
</p>

<p>
He soon caught Velchaninoff up, and smiled timidly at
him, but not with the old drunken grin. He did not
appear to be in the smallest degree drunk.
</p>

<p>
<q>Good evening,</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
<q>How d'ye do?</q> replied Velchaninoff.
</p>



</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XI.</head>

<p>
By replying thus to Pavel Pavlovitch's greeting Velchaninoff
surprised himself. It seemed strange indeed to him that he
should now meet this man without any feeling of anger, and
that there should be something quite novel in his feelings
towards Pavel Pavlovitch&mdash;a sort of call to new relations
with him.
</p>

<p>
<q>What a lovely evening!</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch, looking
observantly into the other's eyes.
</p>

<p>
<q>So you haven't gone away yet!</q> murmured Velchaninoff,
not in a tone of inquiry, but as though musing upon the
fact as he continued to walk on.
</p>

<p>
<q>I've been a good deal delayed; but I've obtained my
petition, my new post, with rise of salary. I'm off the day
after to-morrow for certain.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What? You've obtained the new situation?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And why not?</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch, with a crooked
smile.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, I meant nothing particular by my remark!</q> said
Velchaninoff frowning, and glancing sidelong at his companion.
To his surprise Pavel Pavlovitch, both in dress and
appearance, even down to the hat with the crape band,
was incomparably neater and tidier-looking than he was
wont to be a fortnight since.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why was he sitting in the public-house then?</q> thought
Velchaninoff. This fact puzzled him much.
</p>

<p>
<q>I wished to let you know of my other great joy, Alexey
Ivanovitch!</q> resumed Pavel.
</p>

<p>
<q>Joy?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I'm going to marry.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, sir! after sorrow, joy! It is ever thus in life.
Oh! Alexey Ivanovitch, I should so much like if&mdash;but you
look as though you were in a great hurry.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, I am in a hurry, and I am ill besides.</q> He felt as
though he would give anything to get rid of the man; the
feeling of readiness to develop new and better relations with
him had vanished in a moment.
</p>

<p>
<q>I should so much like&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch did not finish his sentence; Velchaninoff
kept silence and waited.
</p>

<p>
<q>In that case, perhaps another time&mdash;if we should happen
to meet.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, yes, another time,</q> said Velchaninoff quickly,
continuing to move along, and never looking at his
companion.
</p>

<p>
Nothing was said for another minute or two. Pavel
Pavlovitch continued to trot alongside.
</p>

<p>
<q>In that case, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>au revoir</foreign>,</q> he blurted, at last. <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Au
revoir!</foreign> I hope&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff did not think it necessary to hear him complete
his sentence; he left Pavel, and returned home much agitated.
The meeting with <q>that fellow</q> had been too much for his
present state of mind. As he lay down upon his bed the
thought came over him once more: <q>Why was that fellow
there, close to the cemetery?</q> He determined to go
down to the Pogoryeltseffs' next morning; not that he
felt inclined to go&mdash;any sympathy was intolerably painful
to him,&mdash;but they had been so kind and so anxious
about him, that he must really make up his mind to go.
But next day, while finishing his breakfast, he felt terribly
disinclined for the visit; he felt, as it were, shy of meeting
them for the first time after his grief. <q>Shall I go or not?</q>
he was saying to himself, as he sat at his table. When
suddenly, to his extreme amazement, in walked Pavel
Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
In spite of yesterday's <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>rencontre</foreign>, Velchaninoff could not
have believed that this man would ever enter his rooms again;
and when he now saw him appear, he gazed at him in such
absolute astonishment, that he simply did not know what to
say. But Pavel Pavlovitch took the management of the
matter into his own hands; he said <q>good morning,</q> and sat
down in the very same chair which he had occupied on his
last visit, three weeks since.
</p>

<p>
This circumstance reminded Velchaninoff too painfully of
that visit, and he glared at his visitor with disgust and
some agitation.
</p>

<p>
<q>You are surprised, I see!</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch,
reading the other's expression.
</p>

<p>
He seemed to be both freer, more at his ease, and yet
more timid than yesterday. His outward appearance was
very curious to behold; for Pavel Pavlovitch was not only
<emph>neatly</emph> dressed, he was <q>got up</q> in the pink of fashion.
He had on a neat summer overcoat, with a pair of light
trousers and a white waistcoat; his gloves, his gold eye-glasses
(quite a new acquisition), and his linen were quite
above all criticism; he wafted an odour of sweet scent
when he moved. He looked funny, but his appearance
awakened strange thoughts besides.
</p>

<p>
<q>Of course I have surprised you, Alexey Ivanovitch,</q> he
said, twisting himself about; <q>I see it. But in my opinion
there should be a something exalted, something higher&mdash;untouched
and unattainable by petty discords, or the ordinary
conditions of life, between man and man. Don't you agree
with me, sir?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Pavel Pavlovitch, say what you have to say as quickly as
you can, and without further ceremony,</q> said Velchaninoff,
frowning angrily.
</p>

<p>
<q>In a couple of words, sir,</q> said Pavel, hurriedly, <q>I
am going to be married, and I am now off to see my bride&mdash;at
once. She lives in the country; and what I desire is,
the profound honour of introducing <emph>you</emph> to the family, sir;
in fact, I have come here to petition you, sir</q> (Pavel
Pavlovitch bent his head deferentially)&mdash;<q>to beg you to go
down with me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Go down with you? Where to?</q> cried the other, his
eyes starting out of his head.
</p>

<p>
<q>To their house in the country, sir. Forgive me, my dear
sir, if I am too agitated, and confuse my words;
but I am so dreadfully afraid of hearing you refuse
me.</q>
</p>

<p>
He looked at Velchaninoff plaintively.
</p>

<p>
<q>You wish me to accompany you to see your bride?</q>
said Velchaninoff, staring keenly at Pavel Pavlovitch; he
could not believe either his eyes or his ears.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes&mdash;yes, sir!</q> murmured Pavel, who had suddenly
become timid to a painful degree. <q>Don't be angry,
Alexey Ivanovitch, it is not my audacity that prompts me
to ask you this; I do it with all humility, and conscious of
the unusual nature of my petition. I&mdash;I thought perhaps
you would not refuse my humble request.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In the first place, the thing is absolutely out of the
question,</q> said Velchaninoff, turning away in considerable
mental perturbation.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is only my immeasurable longing that prompts me to
ask you. I confess I have a reason for desiring it, which
reason I propose to reveal to you afterwards; just now
I&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The thing is quite impossible, however you may look
at it. You must admit yourself that it is so!</q> cried
Velchaninoff. Both men had risen from their chairs in the
excitement of the conversation.
</p>

<p>
<q>Not at all&mdash;not at all; it is quite possible, sir. In the
first place, I merely propose to introduce you as my friend;
and in the second place, you know the family already, the
Zachlebnikoff's&mdash;State Councillor Zachlebnikoff!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What? how so?</q> cried Velchaninoff. This was the
very man whom he had so often tried to find at home, and
whom he never succeeded in hunting down&mdash;the very
lawyer who had acted for his adversary in the late legal
proceedings.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, certainly&mdash;certainly!</q> cried Pavel Pavlovitch,
apparently taking heart at Velchaninoff's extreme display of
amazement. <q>The very same man whom I saw you talking
to in the street one day; when I watched you from the
other side of the road, I was waiting my turn to speak to
him then. We served in the same department twelve years
since. I had no thought of all this that day I saw you
with him; the whole idea is quite new and sudden&mdash;only a
week old.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But&mdash;excuse me; why, surely this is a most respectable
family, isn't it?</q> asked Velchaninoff, na&iuml;vely.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, and what if it is respectable?</q> said Pavel, with a
twist.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, no&mdash;of course, I meant nothing; but, so far as I could
judge from what I saw, there&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>They remember&mdash;they remember your coming down,</q>
cried Pavel delightedly. <q>I told them all sorts of flattering
things about you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But, look here, how are you to marry within three months
of your late wife's death?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! the wedding needn't be at once. The wedding can
come off in nine or ten months, so that I shall have been in
mourning exactly a year. Believe me, my dear sir, it's all
most charming&mdash;first place, Fedosie Petrovitch has known
me since I was a child; he knew my late wife; he knows
how much income I have; he knows all about my little
private capital, and all about my new increase of salary.
So that you see the whole thing is a mere matter of weights
and scales.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Is she a daughter of his, then?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I'll tell you all about it,</q> said Pavel, licking his lips
with pleasure. <q>May I smoke a cigarette? Now, you
see, men like Fedosie Petrovitch Zachlebnikoff are much
valued in the State; but, excepting for a few perquisites
allowed them, the pay is wretched; they live well enough,
but they cannot possibly lay by money. Now, imagine,
this man has eight daughters and only one little boy: if he
were to die there would be nothing but a wretched little
pension to keep the lot of them. Just imagine now&mdash;<emph>boots</emph>
alone for such a family, eh? Well, out of these eight girls
five are marriageable, the eldest is twenty-four already (a
splendid girl, she is, you shall see her for yourself). The
sixth is a girl of fifteen, still at school. Well, all those five
elder girls have to be trotted about and shown off, and what
does all that sort of thing cost the poor father, sir? They
must be married. Then suddenly I appear on the scene&mdash;the
first probable bridegroom in the family, and they all
know that I have money. Well, there you are, sir&mdash;the
thing's done.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch was intoxicated with enthusiasm.
</p>

<p>
<q>Are you engaged to the eldest?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>N&mdash;no;&mdash;not the eldest. I am wooing the sixth girl,
the one at school.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What?</q> cried Velchaninoff, laughing in spite of himself.
<q>Why, you say yourself she's only fifteen years old.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Fifteen <emph>now</emph>, sir; but she'll be sixteen in nine months&mdash;sixteen
and three months&mdash;so why not? It wouldn't be quite
nice to make the engagement public just yet, though; so
there's to be nothing formal at present, it's only a private
arrangement between the parents and myself so far. Believe
me, my dear sir, the whole thing is apple-pie, regular and
charming.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Then it isn't quite settled yet?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, <emph>quite</emph> settled&mdash;quite settled. Believe me, it's all as
right and tight as&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Does <emph>she</emph> know?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, you see, just for form's sake, it is not actually
talked about&mdash;to her I mean,&mdash;but she <emph>knows</emph> well enough.
Oh! now you <emph>will</emph> make me happy this once, Alexey
Ivanovitch, won't you?</q> he concluded, with extreme
timidity of voice and manner.
</p>

<p>
<q>But why should <emph>I</emph> go with you? However,</q> added
Velchaninoff impatiently, <q>as I am not going in any case, I
don't see why I should hear any reasons you may adduce
for my accompanying you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Alexey Ivanovitch!&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, come! you don't suppose I am going to sit down
in a carriage with you alongside, and drive down there!
Come, just think for yourself!</q>
</p>

<p>
The feeling of disgust and displeasure which Pavel
Pavlovitch had awakened in him before, had now started
into life again after the momentary distraction of the man's
foolery about his bride. He felt that in another minute or
two he might kick the fellow out before he realized what he
was doing. He felt angry with himself for some reason or
other.
</p>

<p>
<q>Sit down, Alexey Ivanovitch, sit down! You shall not
repent it!</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch in a wheedling voice.
<q>No, no, no!</q> he added, deprecating the impatient
gesture which Velchaninoff made at this moment.
<q>Alexey Ivanovitch, I entreat you to pause before you
decide definitely. I see you have quite misunderstood
me. I quite realize that I am not for you, nor you for me!
I am not quite so absurd as to be unaware of that fact.
The service I ask of you now shall not compromise you in
any way for the future. I am going away the day after to-morrow,
for certain; let this one day be an exceptional
one for me, sir. I came to you founding my hopes upon
the generosity and nobility of your heart, Alexey Ivanovitch&mdash;upon
those special tender feelings which may, perhaps,
have been aroused in you by late events. Am I explaining
myself clearly, sir; or do you still misunderstand me?</q>
</p>

<p>
The agitation of Pavel Pavlovitch was increasing with
every moment.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff gazed curiously at him.
</p>

<p>
<q>You ask a service of me,</q> he said thoughtfully, <q>and
insist strongly upon my performance of it. This is very
suspicious, in my opinion; I must know more.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The whole service I ask is merely that you will come
with me; and I promise, when we return that I will lay bare
my heart to you as though we were at a confessional. Trust
me this once, Alexey Ivanovitch!</q>
</p>

<p>
But Velchaninoff still held out, and the more obstinately
because he was conscious of a certain worrying feeling
which he had had ever since Pavel Pavlovitch began to
talk about his bride. Whether this feeling was simple
curiosity, or something quite inexplicable, he knew not.
Whatever it was it urged him to agree, and go. And the
more the instinct urged him, the more he resisted it.
</p>

<p>
He sat and thought for a long time, his head resting on
his hand, while Pavel Pavlovitch buzzed about him and
continued to repeat his arguments.
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well,</q> he said at last, <q>very well, I'll go.</q> He
was agitated almost to trembling pitch. Pavel was radiant.
</p>

<p>
<q>Then, Alexey Ivanovitch, change your clothes&mdash;dress
up, will you? Dress up in your own style&mdash;you know so
well how to do it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch danced about Velchaninoff as he
dressed. His state of mind was exuberantly blissful.
</p>

<p>
<q>What in the world does the fellow mean by it all?</q>
thought Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>I'm going to ask you one more favour yet, Alexey Ivanovitch,</q>
cried the other. <q>You've consented to come; you
must be my guide, sir, too.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>For instance, how?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, for instance, here's an important question&mdash;the
crape. Which ought I to do&mdash;tear it off, or leave it on?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Just as you like.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, I want your opinion. What should you do yourself,
if you were wearing crape, under the circumstances?
My own idea was, that if I left it on, I should be giving a
proof of the fidelity of my affections. A very flattering
recommendation, eh, sir?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, take it off, of course.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you really think it's a matter of 'of course'?</q>
Pavel Pavlovitch reflected. <q>No,</q> he continued, <q>do you
know, I think I'd rather leave it on.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, do as you like! He doesn't trust me, at all events,
which is one good thing,</q> thought Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
They left the house at last. Pavel looked over his companion's
smart costume with intense satisfaction. Velchaninoff
was greatly surprised at Pavel's conduct, but not less
so at his own. At the gate there stood a very superior open
carriage.
</p>

<p>
<q>H'm! so you had a carriage in waiting, had you? Then
you were quite convinced that I would consent to come
down with you, I suppose?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I took the carriage for my own use, but I was nearly
sure you would come,</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch, who wore the
air of a man whose cup of happiness is full to the brim.
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't you think you are a little too sanguine in trusting
so much to my benevolence?</q> asked Velchaninoff, as they
took their seats and started. He smiled as he spoke, but
his heart was full of annoyance.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, Alexey Ivanovitch, it is not for <emph>you</emph> to call me a
fool for that,</q> replied Pavel, firmly and impressively.
</p>

<p>
<q>H'm! and Liza?</q> thought Velchaninoff, but he chased
the idea away, he felt as though it were sacrilege to think of
her here; and immediately another thought came in, namely,
how small, how petty a creature he must be himself to harbour
such a thought&mdash;such a mean, paltry sentiment in connection
with Liza's sacred name. So angry was he, that he
felt as though he must stop the carriage and get out, even
though it cost him a struggle with Pavel Pavlovitch to do so.
</p>

<p>
But at this moment Pavel spoke, and the old feeling of
desire to go with him re-entered his soul. <q>Alexey Ivanovitch,</q>
Pavel said, <q>are you a judge of articles of value?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What sort of articles?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Diamonds.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I wish to take down a present with me. What do you
think? Ought I to give her one, or not?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite unnecessary, I should think.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But I wish to do it, badly. The only thing is, what
shall I give?&mdash;a whole set, brooch, ear-rings, bracelet, and
all, or only one article?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How much do you wish to spend?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, four or five hundred roubles.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Bosh!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What, too much?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Buy one bracelet for about a hundred.</q>
</p>

<p>
This advice depressed Pavel Pavlovitch; he grew wondrous
melancholy. He was terribly anxious to spend a lot
of money, and buy the whole set. He insisted upon the
necessity of doing so.
</p>

<p>
A shop was reached and entered, and Pavel bought a
bracelet after all, and that not the one he chose himself, but
the one which his companion fixed upon. Pavel wished to
buy both. When the shopman, who originally asked one
hundred and seventy five, let the bracelet go for a hundred
and fifty roubles, Pavel Pavlovitch was anything but pleased.
He was most anxious to spend a lot of money on the young
lady, and would have gladly paid two hundred roubles for
the same goods, on the slightest encouragement.
</p>

<p>
<q>It doesn't matter, my being in a hurry to give her presents,
does it?</q> he began excitedly, when they were back
in the carriage, and rolling along once more. <q>They are
not <q>swells</q> at all; they live most simply. Innocence loves
presents,</q> he continued, smiling cunningly. <q>You laughed
just now, Alexey Ivanovitch, when I said that the girl was
only fifteen; but, you know, what specially struck me about
her was, that she still goes to school, with a sweet little bag
in her hand, containing copy books and pencils. Ha-ha-ha!
It was the little satchel that <q>fetched</q> me. I do love innocence,
Alexey Ivanovitch. I don't care half so much for
good looks as for innocence. Fancy, she and her friend
were sitting in the corner there, the other day, and roared
with laughter because the cat jumped from a cupboard on to
the sofa, and fell down all of a heap. Why, it smells of
fresh apples, that does, sir. Shall I take off the crape, eh?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Do as you like!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, I'll take it off!</q> He took his hat, tore the crape
off, and threw the latter into the road.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff remarked that as he put his hat on his bald
head once more, he wore an expression of the simplest and
frankest hope and delight.
</p>

<p>
<q>Is he <emph>really</emph> that sort of man?</q> thought Velchaninoff
with annoyance. <q>He surely <emph>can't</emph> be trundling me down
here without some underhand motive&mdash;impossible! He
<emph>can't</emph> be trusting entirely to my generosity?</q> This last idea
seemed to fill him with indignation. <q>What <emph>is</emph> this clown
of a fellow?</q> he continued to reflect. <q>Is he a fool, an
idiot, or simply a <q>permanent husband</q>? I can't make
head or tail of it all!</q>
</p>


</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XII.</head>

<p>
The Zachlebnikoffs were certainly, as Velchaninoff had expressed
it, a most respectable family. Zachlebnikoff himself
was a most eminently dignified and <q>solid</q> gentleman to
look at. What Pavel Pavlovitch had said as to their
resources was, however, quite true; they lived well, but if
paterfamilias were to die, it would be very awkward for
the rest.
</p>

<p>
Old Zachlebnikoff received Velchaninoff most cordially.
He was no longer the legal opponent; he appeared now in
a far more agreeable guise.
</p>

<p>
<q>I congratulate you,</q> he said at once, <q>upon the issue.
I did my best to arrange it so, and your lawyer was a capital
fellow to deal with. You have your sixty thousand without
trouble or worry, you see; and if we hadn't squared it we
might have fought on for two or three years.</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff was introduced to the lady of the house as
well&mdash;an elderly, simple-looking, worn woman. Then the
girls began to troop in, one by one and occasionally two
together. But, somehow, there seemed to be even more
than Velchaninoff had been led to expect; ten or a dozen
were collected already&mdash;he could not count them exactly.
It turned out that some were friends from the neighbouring
houses.
</p>

<p>
The Zachlebnikoffs' country house was a large wooden
structure of no particular style of architecture, but handsome
enough, and was possessed of a fine large garden.
There were, however, two or three other houses built round
the latter, so that the garden was common property for
all, which fact resulted in great intimacy between the
Zachlebnikoff girls and the young ladies of the neighbouring
houses.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff discovered, almost from the first moment,
that his arrival&mdash;in the capacity of Pavel Pavlovitch's friend,
desiring an introduction to the family&mdash;was expected, and
looked forward to as a solemn and important occasion.
</p>

<p>
Being an expert in such matters he very soon observed
that there was even more than this in his reception.
Judging from the extra politeness of the parents, and by the
exceeding smartness of the young ladies, he could not help
suspecting that Pavel Pavlovitch had been improving the
occasion, and that he had&mdash;not, of course, in so many
words&mdash;given to understand that Velchaninoff was a
single man&mdash;dull and disconsolate, and had represented
him as likely enough at any moment to change his manner
of living and set up an establishment, especially as he had
just come in for a considerable inheritance. He thought
that Katerina Fedosievna, the eldest girl&mdash;twenty-four years
of age, and a splendid girl according to Pavel's description&mdash;seemed
rather <q>got up to kill,</q> from the look of her. She
was eminent, even among her well-dressed sisters, for special
elegance of costume, and for a certain originality about the
make-up of her abundant hair.
</p>

<p>
The rest of the girls all looked as though they were well
aware that Velchaninoff was making acquaintance with the
family <q>for Katie,</q> and had come down <q>to have a look
at her.</q> Their looks and words all strengthened the impression
that they were acting with this supposition in view,
as the day went on.
</p>

<p>
Katerina Fedosievna was a fine tall girl, rather plump,
and with an extremely pleasing face. She seemed to be of
a quiet, if not actually sleepy, disposition.
</p>

<p>
<q>Strange, that such a fine girl should be unmarried,</q>
thought Velchaninoff, as he watched her with much
satisfaction.
</p>

<p>
All the sisters were nice-looking, and there were several
pretty faces among the friends assembled. Velchaninoff
was much diverted by the presence of all these young
ladies.
</p>

<p>
Nadejda Fedosievna, the school-girl and bride elect of
Pavel Pavlovitch, had not as yet condescended to appear.
Velchaninoff awaited her coming with a degree of impatience
which surprised and amused him. At last she came,
and came with effect, too, accompanied by a lively girl, her
friend&mdash;Maria Nikitishna&mdash;who was considerably older than
herself and a very old friend of the family, having been
governess in a neighbouring house for some years. She was
quite one of the family, and boasted of about twenty-three
years of age. She was much esteemed by all the girls, and
evidently acted at present as guide, philosopher, and friend
to Nadia (Nadejda). Velchaninoff saw at the first glance
that all the girls were against Pavel Pavlovitch, friends and
all; and when Nadia came in, it did not take him long to
discover that she absolutely <emph>hated</emph> him. He observed,
further, that Pavel Pavlovitch either did not, or <emph>would not</emph>,
notice this fact.
</p>

<p>
Nadia was the prettiest of all the girls&mdash;a little <emph>brunette</emph>,
with an impudent audacious expression; she might have
been a Nihilist from the independence of her look. The sly
little creature had a pair of flashing eyes and a most charming
smile, though as often as not her smile was more full of
mischief and wickedness than of amiability; her lips and teeth
were wonders; she was slender but well put together, and
the expression of her face was thoughtful though at the
same time childish.
</p>

<p>
<q>Fifteen years old</q> was imprinted in every feature of her
face and every motion of her body. It appeared afterwards
that Pavel Pavlovitch had actually seen the girl for the first
time with a little satchel in her hand, coming back from
school. She had ceased to carry the satchel since that day.
</p>

<p>
The present brought down by Pavel Pavlovitch proved a
failure, and was the cause of a very painful impression.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch no sooner saw his bride elect enter the
room than he approached her with a broad grin on his face.
He gave his present with the preface that he <q>offered it
in recognition of the agreeable sensation experienced by
him at his last visit upon the occasion of Nadejda Fedosievna
singing a certain song to the pianoforte,</q> and there he
stopped in confusion and stood before her lost and
miserable, shoving the jeweller's box into her hand. Nadia,
however, would not take the present, and drew her hands
away.
</p>

<p>
She approached her mother imperiously (the latter
looked much put out), and said aloud: <q>I won't take it,
mother.</q> Nadia was blushing with shame and anger.
</p>

<p>
<q>Take it and say <q>thank you</q> to Pavel Pavlovitch for it,</q>
said her father quietly but firmly. He was very far from
pleased.
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite unnecessary, quite unnecessary!</q> he muttered
to Pavel Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
Nadia, seeing there was nothing else to be done, took
the case and curtsied&mdash;just as children do, giving a little
bob down and then a bob up again, as if she had been on
springs.
</p>

<p>
One of the sisters came across to look at the present
whereupon Nadia handed it over to her unopened, thereby
showing that she did not care so much as to look at it herself.
</p>

<p>
The bracelet was taken out and handed around from one
to the other of the company; but all examined it silently,
and some even ironically, only the mother of the family
muttered that the bracelet was <q>very pretty.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch would have been delighted to see the
earth open and swallow him up.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff helped the wretched man out of the mess.
He suddenly began to talk loudly and eloquently about
the first thing that struck him, and before five minutes had
passed he had won the attention of everyone in the room.
He was a wonderfully clever society talker. He had the
knack of putting on an air of absolute sincerity, and of impressing
his hearers with the belief that he considered them
equally sincere; he was able to act the simple, careless, and
happy young fellow to perfection. He was a master of the
art of interlarding his talk with occasional flashes of real
wit, apparently spontaneous but actually pre-arranged, and
very likely <emph>stale</emph>, in so far that he had himself made the joke
before.
</p>

<p>
But to-day he was particularly successful; he felt that he
must talk on and talk well, and he knew that before many
moments were past he should succeed in monopolizing all
eyes and all ears&mdash;that no joke should be laughed at but his
own, and no voice heard but his.
</p>

<p>
And sure enough the spell of his presence seemed to produce
a wonderful effect; in a while the talking and
laughter became general, with Velchaninoff as the centre
and motor of all. Mrs. Zachlebnikoff's kind face lighted
up with real pleasure, and Katie's pretty eyes were alight
with absolute fascination, while her whole visage glowed
with delight.
</p>

<p>
Only Nadia frowned at him, and watched him keenly from
beneath her dark lashes. It was clear that she was prejudiced
against him. This last fact only roused Velchaninoff
to greater exertions. The mischievous Maria Nikitishna,
however, as Nadia's ally, succeeded in playing off a successful
piece of chaff against Velchaninoff; she pretended that
Pavel Pavlovitch had represented Velchaninoff as the friend
of his childhood, thereby making the latter out to be some
seven or eight years older than he really was. Velchaninoff
liked the look of Maria, notwithstanding.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch was the picture of perplexity. He
quite understood the success which his <q>friend</q> was
achieving, and at first he felt glad and proud of that success,
laughing at the jokes and taking a share of the conversation;
but for some reason or other he gradually relapsed
into thoughtfulness, and thence into melancholy&mdash;which
fact was sufficiently plain from the expression of his lugubrious
and careworn physiognomy.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, my dear fellow, you are the sort of guest one need
not exert oneself to entertain,</q> said old Zachlebnikoff at
last, rising and making for his private study, where he had
business of importance awaiting his attention; <q>and I was
led to believe that you were the most morose of hypochondriacs.
Dear me! what mistakes one does make about
other people, to be sure!</q>
</p>

<p>
There was a grand piano in the room, and Velchaninoff
suddenly turned to Nadia and remarked:
</p>

<p>
<q>You sing, don't you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Who told you I did?</q> said Nadia curtly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Pavel Pavlovitch.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It isn't true; I only sing for a joke&mdash;I have no voice.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, but I have no voice either, and yet I sing!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, you sing to us first, and then I'll sing,</q> said
Nadia, with sparkling eyes; <q>not now though&mdash;after
dinner. I hate music,</q> she added, <q>I'm so sick of the
piano. We have singing and strumming going on all day here;&mdash;and
Katie is the only one of us all worth hearing!</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff immediately attacked Katie, and besieged
her with petitions to play. This attention from him to her
eldest daughter so pleased mamma that she flushed up with
satisfaction.
</p>

<p>
Katie went to the piano, blushing like a school-girl, and
evidently much ashamed of herself for blushing; she
played some little piece of Haydn's correctly enough but
without much expression.
</p>

<p>
When she had finished Velchaninoff praised the music
warmly&mdash;Haydn's music generally, and this little piece in
particular. He looked at Katie too, with admiration, and
his expression seemed to say. <q>By Jove, you're a fine girl!</q>
So eloquent was his look that everyone in the room was
able to read it, and especially Katie herself.
</p>

<p>
<q>What a pretty garden you have!</q> said Velchaninoff after
a short pause, looking through the glass doors of the balcony.
<q>Let's all go out; may we?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, yes! do let's go out!</q> cried several voices together.
He seemed to have hit upon the very thing most
desired by all.
</p>

<p>
So they all adjourned into the garden, and walked about
there until dinner-time; and Velchaninoff had the opportunity
of making closer acquaintance with some of the
girls of the establishment. Two or three young fellows
<q>dropped in</q> from the neighbouring houses&mdash;a student, a
school-boy, and another young fellow of about twenty in a
pair of huge spectacles. Each of these young fellows
immediately attached himself to the particular young lady of
his choice.
</p>

<p>
The young man in spectacles no sooner arrived than he
went aside with Nadia and Maria Nikitishna, and entered
into an animated whispering conversation with them, with
much frowning and impatience of manner.
</p>

<p>
This gentleman seemed to consider it his mission to
treat Pavel Pavlovitch with the most ineffable contempt.
</p>

<p>
Some of the girls proposed a game. One of them
suggested <q>Proverbs,</q> but it was voted dull; another
suggested acting, but the objection was made that they
never knew how to finish off.
</p>

<p>
<q>It may be more successful with you,</q> said Nadia to
Velchaninoff confidentially. <q>You know we all thought you
were Pavel Pavlovitch's friend, but it appears that he was
only boasting. I am <emph>very</emph> glad you have come&mdash;for a certain
reason!</q> she added, looking knowingly into Velchaninoff's
face, and then retreating back again to Maria's wing, blushing.
</p>

<p>
<q>We'll play <q>Proverbs</q> in the evening,</q> said another, <q>and
we'll all chaff Pavel Pavlovitch; <emph>you</emph> must help us too!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>We <emph>are</emph> so glad you're come&mdash;it's so dull here as a
rule,</q> said a third, a funny-looking red-haired girl, whose
face was comically hot, with running apparently. Goodness
knows where she had dropped from; Velchaninoff had not
observed her arrive.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch's agitation increased every moment.
Meanwhile Velchaninoff took the opportunity of making
great friends with Nadia. She had ceased to frown at him
as before, and had now developed the wildest of spirits,
dancing and jumping about, singing and whistling, and
occasionally even catching hold of his hand in her innocent
friendliness.
</p>

<p>
She was very happy indeed, apparently; but she took no
more notice of Pavel Pavlovitch than if he had not been
there at all.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch was very jealous of all this, and once
or twice when Nadia and Velchaninoff talked apart, he
joined them and rudely interrupted their conversation by
interposing his anxious face between them.
</p>

<p>
Katia could not help being fully aware by this time that
their charming guest had not come in for her sake, as had
been believed by the family; indeed, it was clear that Nadia
interested him so much that she excluded everyone else,
to a considerable extent, from his attention. However, in
spite of this, her good-natured face retained its amiability of
expression all the same. She seemed to be happy enough
witnessing the happiness of the rest and listening to the
merry talk; she could not take a large share in the conversation
herself, poor girl!
</p>

<p>
<q>What a fine girl your sister, Katerina Fedosievna is,</q>
remarked Velchaninoff to Nadia.
</p>

<p>
<q>Katia? I should think so! there is no better girl in
the world. She's our family angel! I'm in love with her
myself!</q> replied Nadia enthusiastically.
</p>

<p>
At last, dinner was announced, and a very good dinner it
was, several courses being added for the benefit of the
guests: a bottle of tokay made its appearance, and champagne
was handed round in honour of the occasion. The
good humour of the company was general, old Zachlebnikoff
was in high spirits, having partaken of an extra glass of
wine this evening. So infectious was the hilarity that even
Pavel Pavlovitch took heart of grace and made a pun.
From the end of the table where he sat beside the lady of
the house, there suddenly came a loud laugh from the
delighted girls who had been fortunate enough to hear the
virgin attempt.
</p>

<p>
<q>Papa, papa, Pavel Pavlovitch has made a joke!</q> cried
several at once: <q>he says that there is quite a <q>galaxy of
gals</q> here!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oho! <emph>he's</emph> made a pun too, has he?</q> cried the old
fellow. <q>Well, what is it, let's have it!</q> He turned to
Pavel Pavlovitch with beaming face, prepared to roar over
the latter's joke.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, I tell you, he says there's quite a <q>galaxy of
gals.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, go on, where's the joke?</q> repeated papa, still
dense to the merits of the pun, but beaming more and
more with benevolent desire to see it.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, papa, how stupid you are not to see it. Why <q>gals</q>
and <q>galaxy,</q> don't you see?&mdash;he says there's quite a gal-axy
of gals!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! oh!</q> guffawed the old gentleman, <q>Ha-ha!
Well, we'll hope he'll make a better one next time, that's
all.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Pavel Pavlovitch can't acquire all the perfections at
once,</q> said Maria Nikitishna. <q>Oh, my goodness! he's
swallowed a bone&mdash;look!</q> she added, jumping up from her
chair.
</p>

<p>
The alarm was general, and Maria's delight was great.
</p>

<p>
Poor Pavel Pavlovitch had only choked over a glass of
wine, which he seized and drank to hide his confusion; but
Maria declared that it was a fishbone&mdash;that she had seen it
herself, and that people had been known to die of swallowing
a bone just like that.
</p>

<p>
<q>Clap him on the back!</q> cried somebody.
</p>

<p>
It appeared that there were numerous kind friends ready
to perform this friendly office, and poor Pavel protested in
vain that it was nothing but a common choke. The belabouring
went on until the coughing fit was over, and it
became evident that mischievous Maria was at the bottom
of it all.
</p>

<p>
After dinner old Mr. Zachlebnikoff retired for his post-prandial
nap, bidding the young people enjoy themselves
in the garden as best they might.
</p>

<p>
<q>You enjoy yourself, too!</q> he added to Pavel Pavlovitch,
tapping the latter's shoulder affably as he went
by.
</p>

<p>
When the party were all collected in the garden once
more, Pavel suddenly approached Velchaninoff: <q>One
moment,</q> he whispered, pulling the latter by the coat-sleeve.
</p>

<p>
The two men went aside into a lonely by-path.
</p>

<p>
<q>None of that <emph>here</emph>, please; I won't allow it here!</q> said
Pavel Pavlovitch in a choking whisper.
</p>

<p>
<q>None of what? Who?</q> asked Velchaninoff, staring
with all his eyes.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch said nothing more, but gazed furiously
at his companion, his lips trembling in a desperate attempt
at a pretended smile. At this moment the voices of several
of the girls broke in upon them, calling them to some game.
Velchaninoff shrugged his shoulders and re-joined the
party. Pavel followed him.
</p>

<p>
<q>I'm sure Pavel Pavlovitch was borrowing a handkerchief
from you, wasn't he? He forgot his handkerchief
last time too. Pavel Pavlovitch has forgotten his handkerchief
again, and he has a cold as usual!</q> cried Maria.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, Pavel Pavlovitch, why didn't you say so?</q> cried
Mrs. Zachlebnikoff, making towards the house; <q>you shall
have one at once.</q>
</p>

<p>
In vain poor Pavel protested that he had two of those
necessary articles, and was <emph>not</emph> suffering from a cold. Mrs.
Zachlebnikoff was glad of the excuse for retiring to the
house, and heard nothing. A few moments afterwards a
maid pursued Pavel with a handkerchief, to the confusion
of the latter gentleman.
</p>

<p>
A game of <q>proverbs</q> was now proposed. All sat
down, and the young man with spectacles was made to retire
to a considerable distance and wait there with his nose close
up against the wall and his back turned until the proverb
should have been chosen and the words arranged. Velchaninoff
was the next in turn to be the questioner.
</p>

<p>
Then the cry arose for Pavel Pavlovitch, and the latter,
who had more or less recovered his good humour by this
time, proceeded to the spot indicated; and, resolved to do
his duty like a man, took his stand with his nose to the
wall, ready to stay there motionless until called. The red-haired
young lady was detailed to watch him, in case of
fraud on his part.
</p>

<p>
No sooner, however, had the wretched Pavel taken up
his position at the wall, than the whole party took to their
heels and ran away as fast as their legs could carry
them.
</p>

<p>
<q>Run quick!</q> whispered the girls to Velchaninoff, in
despair, for he had not started with them.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, what's happened? What's the matter?</q> asked
the latter, keeping up as best he could.
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't make a noise! we want to get away and let him
go on standing there&mdash;that's all.</q>
</p>

<p>
Katia, it appeared, did not like this practical joke.
When the last stragglers of the party arrived at the end of
the garden, among them Velchaninoff, the latter found
Katia angrily scolding the rest of the girls.
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well,</q> she was saying, <q>I won't tell mother this
time; but I shall go away myself: it's too bad! What will
the poor fellow's feelings be, standing all alone there, and
finding us fled!</q>
</p>

<p>
And off she went. The rest, however, were entirely
unsympathizing, and enjoyed the joke thoroughly. Velchaninoff
was entreated to appear entirely unconscious when
Pavel Pavlovitch should appear again, just as though
nothing whatever had happened. It was a full quarter of
an hour before Pavel put in an appearance, two thirds, at
least, of that time he must have stood at the wall. When
he reached the party he found everyone busy over a game
of <hi rend='italic'>Gori&eacute;lki</hi>, laughing and shouting and making themselves
thoroughly happy.
</p>

<p>
Wild with rage, Pavel Pavlovitch again made straight for
Velchaninoff, and tugged him by the coat-sleeve.
</p>

<p>
<q>One moment, sir!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, my goodness! he's always coming in with his <q>one
moments</q>!</q> said someone.
</p>

<p>
<q>A handkerchief wanted again probably!</q> shouted
someone else after the pair as they retired.
</p>

<p>
<q>Come now, this time it was you! You were the originator
of this insult!</q> muttered Pavel, his teeth chattering
with fury.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff interrupted him, and strongly recommended
Pavel to bestir himself to be merrier.
</p>

<p>
<q>You are chaffed because you get angry,</q> he said; <q>if
you try to be jolly instead of sulky you'll be let alone!</q>
</p>

<p>
To his surprise these words impressed Pavel deeply;
he was quiet at once, and returned to the party with a
guilty air, and immediately began to take part in the games
engaged in once more. He was not further bullied at
present, and within half an hour his good humour seemed
quite re-established.
</p>

<p>
To Velchaninoff's astonishment, however, he never seemed
to presume to speak to Nadia, although he kept as close
to her, on all occasions, as he possibly could. He
seemed to take his position as quite natural, and was not
put out by her contemptuous air towards him.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch was teased once more, however, before
the evening ended.
</p>

<p>
A game of <q>Hide-and-seek</q> was commenced, and Pavel
had hidden in a small room in the house. Being observed
entering there by someone, he was locked in, and left there
raging for an hour. Meanwhile, Velchaninoff learned the
<q>special reason</q> for Nadia's joy at his arrival. Maria conducted
him to a lonely alley, where Nadia was awaiting
him alone.
</p>

<p>
<q>I have quite convinced myself,</q> began the latter, when
they were left alone, <q>that you are not nearly so great a
friend of Pavel Pavlovitch as he gave us to understand. I
have also convinced myself that you alone can perform a
certain great service for me. Here is his horrid bracelet</q>
(she drew the case out of her pocket)&mdash;<q>I wish to ask you
to be so kind as to return it to him; I cannot do so myself,
because I am quite determined never to speak to him
again all my life. You can tell him so from me, and
better add that he is not to worry me with any more of his
nasty presents. I'll let him know something else I have to
say through other channels. Will you do this for me?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, for goodness sake, spare me!</q> cried Velchaninoff,
almost wringing his hands.
</p>

<p>
<q>How spare you?</q> cried poor Nadia. Her artificial tone
put on for the occasion had collapsed at once before this
check, and she was nearly crying. Velchaninoff burst out
laughing.
</p>

<p>
<q>I don't mean&mdash;I should be delighted, you know&mdash;but the
thing is, I have my own accounts to settle with him!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I knew you weren't his friend, and that he was lying.
I shall never marry him&mdash;never! You may rely on that! I
don't understand how he could dare&mdash;at all events, you
really <emph>must</emph> give him back this horrid bracelet. What am
I to do if you don't? I <emph>must</emph> have it given back to him this
very day. He'll catch it if he interferes with father about
me!</q>
</p>

<p>
At this moment the spectacled young gentleman issued
from the shrubs at their elbow.
</p>

<p>
<q>You are bound to return the bracelet!</q> he burst out
furiously, upon Velchaninoff, <q>if only out of respect to the
rights of woman&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
He did not finish the sentence, for Nadia pulled him
away from beside Velchaninoff with all her strength.
</p>

<p>
<q>How stupid you are,</q> she cried; <q>go away. How dare
you listen? I told you to stand a long way off!</q> She
stamped her foot with rage, and for some while after the
young fellow had slunk away she continued to walk along
with flashing eyes, furious with indignation. <q>You
wouldn't believe how stupid he is!</q> she cried at last.
<q>You laugh, but think of my feelings!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That's not <emph>he</emph>, is it?</q> laughed Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>Of course not. How could you imagine such a thing!
It's only his friend, and how he can choose such friends I
can't understand! They say he is a <q>future motive-power,</q>
but I don't see it. Alexey Ivanovitch, for the last time&mdash;I
have no one else to ask&mdash;will you give the bracelet back or
not?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well, I will. Give it to me!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, you dear, good Alexey Ivanovitch, thanks!</q> she
cried, enthusiastic with delight. <q>I'll sing all the evening
for that! I sing beautifully, you know! I was telling you
a wicked story before dinner. Oh, I <emph>wish</emph> you would come
down here again; I'd tell you <emph>all</emph>, then, and lots of other
things besides&mdash;for you are a dear, kind, good fellow, like&mdash;like
Katia!</q>
</p>

<p>
And sure enough when they reached home she sat down
and sang a couple of songs in a voice which, though entirely
untrained, was of great natural sweetness and considerable
strength.
</p>

<p>
When the party returned from the garden they had found
Pavel Pavlovitch drinking tea with the old folks on the
balcony. He had probably been talking on serious topics,
as he was to take his departure the day after to-morrow for
nine months. He never so much as glanced at Velchaninoff
and the rest when they entered; but he evidently had not
complained to the authorities, and all was quiet as yet.
But, when Nadia began to sing, he came in. Nadia did
not answer a single one of his questions, but he did not
seem offended by this, and took his stand behind her chair.
Once there, his whole appearance gave it to be understood
that that was his own place by right, and that he allowed
none to dispute it.
</p>

<p>
<q>It's Alexey Ivanovitch's turn to sing now!</q> cried the
girls, when Nadia's song was finished, and all crowded round
to hear Velchaninoff, who sat down to accompany himself.
He chose a song of Glinke's, too much neglected nowadays;
it ran:&mdash;
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>When from your merry lips</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>Tenderness flows,</q> &amp;c.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Velchaninoff seemed to address the words to Nadia exclusively,
but the whole party stood around him. His voice
had long since gone the way of all flesh, but it was clear
that he must have had a good one once, and it so happened
that Velchaninoff had heard this particular song many
years ago, from Glinkes' own lips, when a student at the
university, and remembered the great effect that it had
made upon him when he first heard it. The song was full
of the most intense passion of expression, and Velchaninoff
sang it well, with his eyes fixed upon Nadia.
</p>

<p>
Amid the applause that followed the completion of the
performance, Pavel Pavlovitch came forward, seized
Nadia's hand and drew her away from the proximity of
Velchaninoff; he then returned to the latter at the piano,
and, with every evidence of frantic rage, whispered to him,
his lips all of a tremble,
</p>

<p>
<q>One moment with you!</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff, seeing that the man was capable of worse
things in his then frame of mind, took Pavel's hand and led
him out through the balcony into the garden&mdash;quite dark
now.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you understand, sir, that you must come away at
once&mdash;<emph>this very minute</emph>?</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
<q>No, sir, I do not!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you remember,</q> continued Pavel in his frenzied
whisper, <q>do you remember that you begged me to tell you
<emph>all</emph>, <emph>everything</emph>&mdash;down to the smallest details? Well, the
time has come for telling you all&mdash;come!</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff considered a moment, glanced once more at
Pavel Pavlovitch, and consented to go.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! stay and have another cup of tea!</q> said Mrs.
Zachlebnikoff, when this decision was announced.
</p>

<p>
<q>Pavel Pavlovitch, why are you taking Alexey
Ivanovitch away?</q> cried the girls, with angry looks. As
for Nadia, she looked so cross with Pavel, that the latter
felt absolutely uncomfortable; but he did not give in.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, but I am very much obliged to Pavel Pavlovitch,</q>
said Velchaninoff, <q>for reminding me of some most important
business which I must attend to this very evening,
and which I might have forgotten,</q> laughed Velchaninoff,
as he shook hands with his host and made his bow to the
ladies, especially to Katia, as the family thought.
</p>

<p>
<q>You must come again soon!</q> said the host; <q>we have
been so glad to see you; it was so good of you to come!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, <emph>so</emph> glad!</q> said the lady of the house.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do come again soon!</q> cried the girls, as Pavel
Pavlovitch and Velchaninoff took their seats in the carriage;
<q>Alexey Ivanovitch, <emph>do</emph> come back soon!</q> And with
these voices in their ears they drove away.
</p>


</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XIII.</head>

<p>
In spite of Velchaninoff's apparently happy day, the
feeling of annoyance and suffering at his heart had hardly
actually left him for a single moment. Before he sang the
song he had not known what to do with himself, or suppressed
anger and melancholy&mdash;perhaps that was the reason
why he had sung with so much feeling and passion.
</p>

<p>
<q>To think that I could so have lowered myself as to
forget everything!</q> he thought&mdash;and then despised
himself for thinking it; <q>it is more humiliating still to cry
over what is done,</q> he continued. <q>Far better to fly into a
passion with someone instead.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Fool!</q> he muttered&mdash;looking askance at Pavel
Pavlovitch, who sat beside him as still as a mouse. Pavel
Pavlovitch preserved a most obstinate silence&mdash;probably
concentrating and ranging his energies. He occasionally
took his hat off, impatiently, and wiped the perspiration
from his forehead.
</p>

<p>
Once&mdash;and once only&mdash;Pavel spoke, to the coachman,
he asked whether there was going to be a thunder-storm.
</p>

<p>
<q>Wheugh!</q> said the man, <q>I should think so! It's
been a steamy day&mdash;just the day for it!</q>
</p>

<p>
By the time town was reached&mdash;half-past ten&mdash;the whole
sky was overcast.
</p>

<p>
<q>I am coming to your house,</q> said Pavel to Velchaninoff,
when almost at the door.
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite so; but I warn you, I feel very unwell to-night!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>All right&mdash;I won't stay too long.</q>
</p>

<p>
When the two men passed under the gateway, Pavel
Pavlovitch disappeared into the 'dvornik's' room for a
minute, to speak to Mavra.
</p>

<p>
<q>What did you go in there for?</q> asked Velchaninoff
severely as they mounted the stairs and reached his own door.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh&mdash;nothing&mdash;nothing at all,&mdash;just to tell them about
the coachman.&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well. Mind, I shall not allow you to drink!</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch did not answer.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff lit a candle, while Pavel threw himself into a
chair;&mdash;then the former came and stood menacingly before
him.
</p>

<p>
<q>I may have told you I should have <emph>my</emph> last word to say
to-night, as well as you!</q> he said with suppressed anger
in his voice and manner: <q>Here it is. I consider conscientiously
that things are square between you and me, now;
and therefore there is no more to be said, understand me,
about <emph>anything</emph>. Since this is so, had you not better go, and
let me close the door after you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Let's cry <q>quits</q> first, Alexey Ivanovitch,</q> said Pavel
Pavlovitch, gazing into Velchaninoff's eyes with great
sweetness.
</p>

<p>
<q>Quits?</q> cried the latter, in amazement; <q>you strange
man, what are we to cry quits about? Are you harping
upon your promise of a <q>last word</q>?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, well, we have nothing more to cry quits for. We
have been quits long since,</q> said Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>Dear me, do you really think so?</q> cried Pavel Pavlovitch,
in a shrill, sharp voice, pressing his two hands tightly
together, finger to finger, as he held them up before his
breast.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff said nothing. He rose from his seat and
began to walk up and down the room. The word <q>Liza</q>
resounded through and through his soul like the voice of a
bell.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, what is there that you still consider unsettled between
us?</q> he asked at last, looking angrily at Pavel, who
had never ceased to follow him with his eyes&mdash;always
holding his hands before his breast, finger tip to finger
tip.
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't go down there any more,</q> said Pavel, almost in
a whisper, and rising from his seat with every indication of
humble entreaty.
</p>

<p>
<q><emph>What!</emph> is <emph>that</emph> all?</q> cried Velchaninoff, bursting into
an angry laugh; <q>good heavens, man, you have done nothing
but surprise me all day.</q> He had begun in a tone of
exasperation, but he now abruptly changed both voice and
expression, and continued with an air of deep feeling.
<q>Listen,</q> he said, <q>listen to me. I don't think I have
ever felt so deeply humiliated as I am feeling now, in consequence
of the events of to-day. In the first place, that I
should have condescended to go down with you at all, and
in the second place, all that happened there. It has been
such a day of pettifogging&mdash;pitiful pettifogging. I have
profaned and lowered myself by taking a share in it all, and
forgetting&mdash;&mdash;Well, it's done now. But look here&mdash;you fell
upon me to-day, unawares&mdash;upon a sick man. Oh, you
needn't excuse yourself; at all events I shall certainly <emph>not</emph>
go there again. I have not the slightest interest in so
doing,</q> he concluded, with an air of decision.
</p>

<p>
<q>No, really!</q> cried Pavel Pavlovitch, making no secret
of his delight and exultation.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff glanced contemptuously at him, and recommenced
his march up and down the room.
</p>

<p>
<q>You have determined to be happy under any circumstances,
I suppose?</q> he observed, after a pause. He could
not resist making the remark disdainfully.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, I have,</q> said Pavel, quietly.
</p>

<p>
<q>It's no business of mine that he's a fool and a knave,
out of pure idiocy!</q> thought Velchaninoff. <q>I can't help
hating him, though I feel that he is not even worth hating.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I'm a permanent husband,</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch, with
the most exquisitely servile irony, at his own expense. <q>I
remember you using that expression, Alexey Ivanovitch,
long ago, when you were with us at T&mdash;&mdash;. I remember
many of your original phrases of that time, and when you
spoke of <q>permanent husbands,</q> the other day, I recollected
the expression.</q>
</p>

<p>
At this point Mavra entered the room with a bottle of
champagne and two glasses.
</p>

<p>
<q>Forgive me, Alexey Ivanovitch,</q> said Pavel, <q>you know
I can't get on without it. Don't consider it an audacity on
my part&mdash;think of it as a mere bit of by-play unworthy your
notice.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well,</q> consented Velchaninoff, with a look of disgust,
<q>but I must remind you that I don't feel well, and that&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>One little moment&mdash;I'll go at once, I really will&mdash;I
<emph>must</emph> just drink <emph>one</emph> glass, my throat is so&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
He seized the bottle eagerly, and poured himself out a
glass, drank it greedily at a gulp, and sat down. He looked
at Velchaninoff almost tenderly.
</p>

<p>
<q>What a nasty looking beast!</q> muttered the latter to
himself.
</p>

<p>
<q>It's all her friends that make her like that,</q> said Pavel,
suddenly, with animation.
</p>

<p>
<q>What? Oh, you refer to the lady. I&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And, besides, she is so very young still, you see,</q>
resumed Pavel. <q>I shall be her slave&mdash;she shall see a little
society, and a bit of the world. She will change, sir,
entirely.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I mustn't forget to give him back the bracelet, by-the-bye,</q>
thought Velchaninoff, frowning, as he felt for the case
in his coat pocket.
</p>

<p>
<q>You said just now that I am determined to be happy,
Alexey Ivanovitch,</q> continued Pavel, confidentially, and
with almost touching earnestness. <q>I <emph>must</emph> marry, else
what will become of me? You see for yourself</q> (he
pointed to the bottle), <q>and that's only a hundredth part of
what I demean myself to nowadays. I cannot get on
without marrying again, sir; I <emph>must</emph> have a new faith. If I
can but believe in some one again, sir, I shall rise&mdash;I shall
be saved.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why are you telling <emph>me</emph> all this?</q> exclaimed Velchaninoff,
very nearly laughing in his face; it seemed so absurdly
inconsistent.
</p>

<p>
<q>Look here,</q> he continued, roaring the words out, <q>let
me know now, once for all, why did you drag me down
there? what good was I to do you there?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I&mdash;I wished to try&mdash;&mdash;,</q> began Pavel, with some confusion.
</p>

<p>
<q>Try what?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The effect, sir. You see, Alexey Ivanovitch, I have only
been visiting there a week</q> (he grew more and more confused),
<q>and yesterday, when I met you, I thought to myself
that I had never seen her yet in society; that is, in the
society of other <emph>men</emph> besides myself&mdash;a stupid idea, I know
it is&mdash;I was very anxious to try&mdash;you know my wretchedly
jealous nature.</q> He suddenly raised his head and blushed
violently.
</p>

<p>
<q>He <emph>can't</emph> be telling me the truth!</q> thought Velchaninoff;
he was struck dumb with surprise.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, go on!</q> he muttered at last.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, I see it was all her pretty childish nature, sir&mdash;that
and her friends together. You must forgive my stupid
conduct towards yourself to-day, Alexey Ivanovitch. I will
never do it again&mdash;never again, sir, I assure you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I shall never be there to give you the opportunity,</q>
replied Velchaninoff with a laugh.
</p>

<p>
<q>That's partly why I say it,</q> said Pavel.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, come! I'm not the only man in the world you
know!</q> said the other irritably.
</p>

<p>
<q>I am sorry to hear you say that, Alexey Ivanovitch. My
esteem for Nadejda is such that I&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, forgive me, forgive me! I meant nothing, I assure
you! Only it surprises me that you should have expected so
much of me&mdash;that you trusted me so completely.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I trusted you entirely, sir, solely on account of&mdash;all that
has passed.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>So that you still consider me the most honourable of
men?</q> Velchaninoff paused, the na&iuml;ve nature of his
sudden question surprised even himself.
</p>

<p>
<q>I always did think you that, sir!</q> said Pavel, hanging
his head.
</p>

<p>
<q>Of course, quite so&mdash;I didn't mean quite that&mdash;I
wanted to say, in spite of all prejudices you may have
formed, you&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, in spite of all prejudices!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And when you first came to Petersburg?</q> asked
Velchaninoff, who himself felt the monstrosity of his own
inquisitive questions, but could not resist putting them.
</p>

<p>
<q>I considered you the most honourable of men when I first
came to Petersburg, sir; no less. I always respected you,
Alexey Ivanovitch!</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch raised his eyes and looked at his companion
without the smallest trace of confusion.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff suddenly felt cowed and afraid. He was
anxious that nothing should result&mdash;nothing disagreeable&mdash;from
this conversation, since he himself was responsible for
having initiated it.
</p>

<p>
<q>I loved you, Alexey Ivanovitch; all that year at T&mdash;&mdash;
I loved you&mdash;you did not observe it,</q> continued Pavel
Pavlovitch, his voice trembling with emotion, to the great
discomfiture of his companion. <q>You did not observe
my affection, because I was too lowly a being to deserve any
sort of notice; but it was unnecessary that you should
observe my love. Well, sir, and all these nine years I have
thought of you, for I have never known such a year of life
as that year was.</q> (Pavel's eyes seemed to have a special
glare in them at this point.) <q>I remembered many of your
sayings and expressions, sir, and I thought of you always as
a man imbued with the loftiest sentiments, and gifted with
knowledge and intellect, sir&mdash;of the highest order&mdash;a man
of grand ideas. <q>Great ideas do not proceed so frequently
from greatness of intellect, as from elevation of taste and
feeling.</q> You yourself said that, sir, once. I dare say you
have forgotten the fact, but you did say it. Therefore I
always thought of you, sir, as a man of taste and feeling;
consequently I concluded&mdash;consequently I trusted you, in
spite of everything.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch's chin suddenly began to tremble.
Velchaninoff was frightened out of his wits. This unexpected
tone must be put an end to at all hazards.
</p>

<p>
<q>Enough, Pavel Pavlovitch!</q> he said softly, blushing
violently and with some show of irritation. <q>And why&mdash;why
(Velchaninoff suddenly began to shout passionately)&mdash;why
do you come hanging round the neck of a sick man,
a worried man&mdash;a man who is almost out of his wits with
fever and annoyance of all sorts, and drag him
into this abyss of lies and mirage and vision and shame&mdash;and
unnatural, disproportionate, distorted nonsense! Yes, sir, that's
the most shameful part of the whole business&mdash;the disproportionate
nonsense of what you say! You know it's all humbug;
both of us are mean wretches&mdash;both of us; and if you
like I'll prove to you at once that not only you don't love
me, but that you loathe and hate me with all your heart, and
that you are a liar, whether you know it or not! You took
me down to see your bride, not&mdash;not a bit in the world to
try how she would behave in the society of other men&mdash;absurd
idea!&mdash;You simply saw me, yesterday, and your
vile impulse led you to carry me off there in order that you
might show me the girl, and say, as it were. There, look at
that! She's to be mine! Try your hand <emph>there</emph> if you can! It
was nothing but your challenge to me! You may not have
known it, but this was so, as I say; and you felt the impulse
which I have described. Such a challenge could not
be made without hatred; consequently you hate me.</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff almost <emph>rushed</emph> up and down the room as he
shouted the above words; and with every syllable the
humiliating consciousness that he was allowing himself to descend
to the level of Pavel Pavlovitch afflicted him and
tormented him more and more!
</p>

<p>
<q>I was only anxious to be at peace with you, Alexey
Ivanovitch!</q> said Pavel sadly, his chin and lips working
again.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff flew into a violent rage, as if he had been
insulted in the most unexampled manner.
</p>

<p>
<q>I tell you once more, sir,</q> he cried, <q>that you have attached
yourself to a sick and irritated man, in order that you may
surprise him into saying something unseemly in his madness!
We are, I tell you, man, we are men of different worlds.
Understand me! between us two there is a grave,</q> he hissed
in his fury, and stopped.
</p>

<p>
<q>And how do you know,&mdash;sir,</q> cried Pavel Pavlovitch,
his face suddenly becoming all twisted, and deadly white to
look at, as he strode up to Velchaninoff, <q>how do you
know what that grave means to me, sir, here!</q> (He beat his
breast with terrible earnestness, droll though he looked.)
<q>Yes, sir, we both stand on the brink of the grave, but on my
side there is more, sir, than on yours&mdash;yes, more, more,
more!</q> he hissed, beating his breast without pause&mdash;<q>more
than on yours&mdash;the grave means more to me than to you!</q>
</p>

<p>
But at this moment a loud ring at the bell brought both
men to their senses. Someone was ringing so loud that the
bell-wire was in danger of snapping.
</p>

<p>
<q>People don't ring like that for me, observed Velchaninoff
angrily.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No more they do for me, sir! I assure you they
don't!</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch anxiously. He had become
the quiet timid Pavel again in a moment. Velchaninoff
frowned and went to open the door.
</p>

<p>
<q>Mr. Velchaninoff, if I am not mistaken?</q> said a
strange voice, apparently belonging to some young and very
self-satisfied person, at the door.
</p>

<p>
<q>What is it?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have been informed that Mr. Trusotsky is at this
moment in your rooms. I must see him at once.</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff felt inclined to send this self-satisfied looking
young gentleman flying downstairs again; but he reflected&mdash;refrained,
stood aside and let him in.
</p>

<p>
<q>Here is Mr. Trusotsky. Come in.</q>
</p>


</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XIV.</head>

<p>
A young fellow of some nineteen summers entered the
room; he might have been even younger, to judge by his
handsome but self-satisfied and very juvenile face.
</p>

<p>
He was not badly dressed, at all events his clothes fitted
him well; in stature he was a little above the middle
height; he had thick black hair, and dark, bold eyes&mdash;and
these were the striking features of his face. Unfortunately
his nose was a little too broad and tip-tilted, otherwise he
would have been a really remarkably good-looking young
fellow.&mdash;He came in with some pretension.
</p>

<p>
<q>I believe I have the opportunity of speaking to Mr.
Trusotsky?</q> he observed deliberately, and bringing out the
word opportunity with much apparent satisfaction, as though
he wished to accentuate the fact that he could not possibly
be supposed to feel either honour or pleasure in meeting
Mr. Trusotsky. Velchaninoff thought he knew what all
this meant; Pavel Pavlovitch seemed to have an inkling of
the state of affairs, too. His expression was one of anxiety,
but he did not show the white feather.
</p>

<p>
<q>Not having the honour of your acquaintance,</q> he said
with dignity, <q>I do not understand what sort of business
you can have with me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Kindly listen to me first, and you can then let me know
your ideas on the subject,</q> observed the young gentleman,
pulling out his tortoiseshell glasses, and focusing the
champagne bottle with them. Having deliberately inspected
that object, he put up his glasses again, and fixing his attention
once more upon Pavel Pavlovitch, remarked:
</p>

<p>
<q>Alexander Loboff.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What about Alexander Loboff?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That's my name. You've not heard of me?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>H'm! Well, I don't know when you should have, now
I think of it; but I've come on important business concerning
yourself. I suppose I can sit down? I'm tired.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, pray sit down,</q> said Velchaninoff, but not before
the young man had taken a chair. In spite of the pain at
his heart Velchaninoff could not help being interested in this
impudent youngling.
</p>

<p>
There seemed to be something in his good-looking, fresh
young face that reminded him of Nadia.
</p>

<p>
<q>You can sit down too,</q> observed Loboff, indicating an
empty seat to Pavel Pavlovitch, with a careless nod of his
head.
</p>

<p>
<q>Thank you; I shall stand.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well, but you'll soon get tired. You need not go
away, I think, Mr. Velchaninoff.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have nowhere to go to, my good sir, I am at home.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>As you like; I confess I should prefer your being present
while I have an explanation with this gentleman.
Nadejda Fedosievna has given you a flattering enough
character, sir, to me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nonsense; how could she have had time to do so?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Immediately after you left. Now, Mr. Trusotsky, this
is what I wish to observe,</q> he continued to Pavel, the latter
still standing in front of him; <q>we, that is Nadejda
Fedosievna and myself, have long loved one another, and
have plighted our troth. You have suddenly come between
us as an obstruction; I have come to tell you that
you had better clear out of the way at once. Are you prepared
to adopt my suggestion?</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch took a step backward in amazement;
his face paled visibly, but in a moment a spiteful smile
curled his lip.
</p>

<p>
<q>Not in the slightest degree prepared, sir,</q> he said,
laconically.
</p>

<p>
<q>Dear me,</q> said the young fellow, settling himself comfortably
in his chair, and throwing one leg over the other.
</p>

<p>
<q>Indeed, I do not know whom I am speaking to,</q> added
Pavel Pavlovitch, <q>so that it can't hardly be worth your while
to continue.</q>
</p>

<p>
So saying he sat down at last.
</p>

<p>
<q>I <emph>said</emph> you'd get tired,</q> remarked the youth. <q>I informed
you just now,</q> he added, <q>that my name is
Alexander Loboff, and that Nadejda and I have plighted
our troth; consequently you cannot truthfully say, as you did
say just now, that you don't know who I am, nor can you
honestly assert that you do not see what we can have to
talk about. Not to speak of myself&mdash;there is Nadejda
Fedosievna to be considered&mdash;the lady to whom you have
so impudently attached yourself: that alone is matter sufficient
for explanation between us.</q>
</p>

<p>
All this the young fellow rattled off carelessly enough, as
if the thing were so self-evident that it hardly needed mentioning.
While talking, he raised his eye-glass once more,
and inspected some object for an instant, putting the glass
back in his pocket immediately afterwards.
</p>

<p>
<q>Excuse me, young man,</q> began Pavel Pavlovitch: but
the words <q>young man</q> were fatal.
</p>

<p>
<q>At any other moment,</q> observed the youth, <q>I should
of course forbid your calling me <q>young man</q> at once; but
you must admit that in this case my youth is my principal
advantage over yourself, and that even this very day you
would have given anything&mdash;nay, at the moment when you
presented your bracelet&mdash;to be just a little bit younger.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Cheeky young brat!</q> muttered Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>In any case,</q> began Pavel Pavlovitch, with dignity, <q>I
do not consider your reasons as set forth&mdash;most questionable
and improper reasons at the best&mdash;sufficient to justify
the continuance of this conversation. I see your 'business'
is mere childishness and nonsense: to-morrow I shall have
the pleasure of an explanation with Mr. Zachlebnikoff, my
respected friend. Meanwhile, sir, perhaps you will make it
convenient to&mdash;depart.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That's the sort of man he is,</q> cried the youth, hotly,
turning to Velchaninoff: <q>he is not content with being as
good as kicked out of the place, and having faces made at
him, but he must go down again to-morrow to carry tales
about us to Mr. Zachlebnikoff. Do you not prove by this,
you obstinate man, that you wish to carry off the young lady
by force? that you desire to <emph>buy</emph> her of people who preserve&mdash;thanks
to the relics of barbarism still triumphant
among us&mdash;a species of power over her? Surely she showed
you sufficiently clearly that she <emph>despises</emph> you? You have
had your wretched tasteless present of to-day&mdash;that bracelet
thing&mdash;returned to you; what more do you want?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Excuse me, no bracelet has been, or can be returned
to me,</q> said Pavel Pavlovitch, with a shudder of anxiety,
however.
</p>

<p>
<q>How so? hasn't Mr. Velchaninoff given it to you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, the deuce take you, sir,</q> thought Velchaninoff.
<q>Nadejda Fedosievna certainly did give me this case for
you, Pavel Pavlovitch,</q> he said; <q>I did not wish to take it,
but she was anxious that I should: here it is, I'm very
sorry.</q>
</p>

<p>
He took out the case and laid it down on the table before
the enraged Pavel Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
<q>How is it you have not handed it to him before?</q> asked
the young man severely.
</p>

<p>
<q>I had no time, as you may conclude,</q> said Velchaninoff
with a frown.
</p>

<p>
<q>H'm! Strange circumstance!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><emph>What</emph>, sir?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, you must admit it <emph>is</emph> strange! However,
I am quite prepared to believe that there has been some
mistake.</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff would have given worlds to get up and drub
the impertinent young rascal and drag him out of the house
by the ear; but he could not contain himself, and burst out
laughing. The boy immediately followed suit and laughed
too.
</p>

<p>
But for Pavel Pavlovitch it was no laughing matter.
</p>

<p>
If Velchaninoff had seen the ferocious look which the
former cast at him at the moment when he and Loboff
laughed, he would have realized that Pavel Pavlovitch was
in the act of passing a fatal limit of forbearance. He did not
see the look; but it struck him that it was only fair to stand
up for Pavel now.
</p>

<p>
<q>Listen, Mr. Loboff,</q> he said, in friendly tones, <q>not
to enter into the consideration of other matters, I may point
out that Mr. Trusotsky brings with him, in his wooing of
Miss Zachlebnikoff, a name and circumstances fully well-known
to that esteemed family; in the second place, he
brings a fairly respectable position in the world; and
thirdly, he brings wealth. Therefore he may well be surprised
to find himself confronted by such a rival as yourself&mdash;a
gentleman of great wealth, doubtless, but at the same time
so very young, that he could not possibly look upon you as
a serious rival; therefore, again, he is quite right in begging
you to bring the conversation to an end.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What do you mean by <q>so very young</q>? I was nineteen
a month since; by the law I might have been married
long ago. That's a sufficient answer to your argument.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But what father would consent to allowing his daughter
to marry you <emph>now</emph>&mdash;even though you may be a Rothschild to
come, or a benefactor to humanity in the future. A man of
nineteen years old is not capable of answering for himself
and yet you are ready to take on your own responsibility
another being&mdash;in other words, a being who is as much a
child as you are yourself. Why, it is hardly even honourable
on your part, is it? I have presumed to address you
thus, because you yourself referred the matter to me as a
sort of arbiter between yourself and Pavel Pavlovitch.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, by-the-bye, <q>Pavel Pavlovitch,</q> I forgot he was
called that,</q> remarked the youth. <q>I wonder why I thought
of him all along as <q>Vassili Petrovitch.</q> Look here, sir
(addressing Velchaninoff), you have not surprised me in the
least. I knew you were all tarred with one brush. It is
strange that you should have been described to me as a man
of some originality. However, to business. All that you
have said is, of course, utter nonsense; not only is there
nothing <q>dishonourable</q> about my intentions, as you permitted
yourself to suggest, but the fact of the matter is
entirely the reverse, as I hope to prove to you by-and-bye.
In the first place, we have promised each other marriage,
besides which I have given her my word that if she ever
repents of her promise she shall have her full liberty to
throw me over. I have given her surety to that effect before
witnesses.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I bet anything your friend&mdash;what's his name?&mdash;Predposiloff
invented that idea,</q> cried Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>He-he-he!</q> giggled Pavel Pavlovitch contemptuously.
</p>

<p>
<q>What is that person giggling about? You are right,
sir, it was Predposiloff's idea. But I don't think you and I
quite understand one another, do we? and I had such a
good report of you. How old are you? Are you fifty yet?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Stick to business, if you please.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Forgive the liberty. I did not mean anything offensive.
Well, to proceed. I am no millionaire, and I am no
great benefactor to humanity (to reply to your arguments),
but I shall manage to keep myself and my wife. Of course
I have nothing now; I was brought up, in fact, in their house
from my childhood.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How so?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, because I am a distant relative of this Mr.
Zachlebnikoff's wife. When my people died, he took me in
and sent me to school. The old fellow is really quite a
kind-hearted man, if you only knew it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I do know it!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, he's an old fogey rather, but a kind-hearted old
fellow; but I left him four months ago and began to keep
myself. I first joined a railway office at ten roubles a
month, and am now in a notary's place at twenty-five. I
made him a formal proposal for her a fortnight since. He
first laughed like mad, and afterwards fell into a violent
rage, and Nadia was locked up. She bore it heroically. He
had been furious with me before for throwing up a post in
his department which he procured for me. You see he is a
good and kind old fellow at home, but get him in his office
and&mdash;oh, my word!&mdash;he's a sort of <hi rend='italic'>Jupiter Tonans</hi>! I told
him straight out that I didn't like his ways; but the great
row was&mdash;thanks to the second chief at the office; he said I
insulted him, but I only told him he was an ignorant
beggar. So I threw them all up, and went in for the notary
business. Listen to that! What a clap! We shall have a
thunder-storm directly! What a good thing I arrived
before the rain! I came here on foot, you know, all the
way, nearly at a run, too!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How in the world did you find an opportunity of
speaking to Miss Nadia then? especially since you are not
allowed to meet.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, one can always get over the railing; then there's
that red-haired girl, she helps, and Maria Nikitishna&mdash;oh,
but she's a snake, that girl! What's the matter? Are you
afraid of the thunder-storm?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, I'm ill&mdash;seriously ill!</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff had risen from his seat with a fearful sudden
pain in his chest, and was trying to walk up and down the
room.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, really! then I'm disturbing you. I shall go at
once,</q> said the youth, jumping up.
</p>

<p>
<q>No, you don't disturb me!</q> said Velchaninoff ceremoniously.
</p>

<p>
<q>How not; of course I do, if you've got the stomach
ache! Well now, Vassili&mdash;what's your name&mdash;Pavel
Pavlovitch, let's conclude this matter. I will formulate my
question for once into words which will adapt themselves to
your understanding: Are you prepared to renounce your
claim to the hand of Nadejda Fedosievna before her
parents, and in my presence, with all due formality?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, sir; not in the slightest degree prepared,</q> said
Pavel Pavlovitch witheringly; <q>and allow me to say once
more that all this is childish and absurd, and that you had
better clear out!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Take care,</q> said the youth, holding up a warning forefinger;
<q>better give it up now, for I warn you that otherwise
you will spend a lot of money down there, and take a lot of
trouble; and when you come back in nine months you will
be turned out of the house by Nadejda Fedosievna herself;
and if you don't go <emph>then</emph>, it will be the worse for you.
Excuse me for saying so, but at present you are like the
dog in the manger. Think over it, and be sensible for once
in your life.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Spare me the moral, if you please,</q> began Pavel
Pavlovitch furiously; <q>and as for your low threats I shall
take my measures to-morrow&mdash;<emph>serious</emph> measures.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Low threats? pooh! You are low yourself to take
them as such. Very well, I'll wait till to-morrow then; but
if you&mdash;there's the thunder again!&mdash;<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>au revoir</foreign>&mdash;very glad to
have met you, sir.</q> He nodded to Velchaninoff and made
off hurriedly, evidently anxious to reach home before the
rain.
</p>


</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XV.</head>

<p><q>You see, you see!</q> cried Pavel to Velchaninoff, the
instant that the young fellow's back was turned.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes; you are not going to succeed there,</q> said Velchaninoff.
He would not have been so abrupt and careless
of Pavel's feelings if it had not been for the dreadful pain in
his chest.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch shuddered as though from a sudden
scald. <q>Well, sir, and you&mdash;you were loth to give me
back the bracelet, eh?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I hadn't time.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! you were sorry&mdash;you pitied me, as true friend
pities friend!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, well, I pitied you, then!</q> Velchaninoff was growing
angrier every moment. However, he informed Pavel
Pavlovitch shortly as to how he had received the bracelet,
and how Nadia had almost forced it upon him.
</p>

<p>
<q>You must understand,</q> he added, <q>that otherwise I
should never have agreed to accept the commission; there
are quite enough disagreeables already.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You liked the job, and accepted it with pleasure,</q> giggled
Pavel Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
<q>That is foolish on your part; but I suppose you must
be forgiven. You must have seen from that boy's behaviour
that I play no part in this matter. Others are the principal
actors, not I!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>At all events the job had attractions for you.</q> Pavel
Pavlovitch sat down and poured out a glass of wine.
</p>

<p>
<q>You think I shall knuckle under to that young
gentleman? Pooh! I shall drive him out to-morrow, sir,
like dust. I'll smoke this little gentleman out of his
nursery, sir; you see if I don't.</q> He drank his wine off at
a gulp, and poured out some more. He seemed to grow
freer as the moments went by; he talked glibly now.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ha-ha! Sachinka and Nadienka!<note place="foot"><p>
Short for Alexander and Nadejda.
</p></note> darling little children.
Ha-ha-ha!</q> He was beside himself with fury.
</p>

<p>
At this moment, a terrific crash of thunder startled the
silence, and was followed by flashes of lightning and sheets
of heavy rain. Pavel Pavlovitch rose and shut the window.
</p>

<p>
<q>The fellow asked you if you were afraid of the thunder;
do you remember? Ha-ha-ha! Velchaninoff afraid of
thunder! And all that about <q>fifty years old</q> wasn't bad,
eh? Ha-ha-ha!</q> Pavel Pavlovitch was in a spiteful
mood.
</p>

<p>
<q>You seem to have settled yourself here,</q> said Velchaninoff,
who could hardly speak for agony. <q>Do as you like,
I must lie down.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Come, you wouldn't turn a <emph>dog</emph> out to-night!</q> replied
Pavel, glad of a grievance.
</p>

<p>
<q>Of course, sit down; drink your wine&mdash;do anything you
like,</q> murmured Velchaninoff, as he laid himself flat on his
divan, and groaned with pain.
</p>

<p>
<q>Am I to spend the night? Aren't you afraid?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What of?</q> asked Velchaninoff, raising his head slightly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, nothing. Only last time you seemed to be a little
alarmed, that's all.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You are a fool!</q> said the other angrily, as he turned
his face to the wall.
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well, sir; all right,</q> said Pavel.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff fell asleep within a minute or so of lying
down. The unnatural strain of the day, and his sickly state
of health together, had suddenly undermined his strength,
and he was as weak as a child. But physical pain would
have its own, and soon conquered weakness and sleep; in
an hour he was wide awake again, and rose from the divan
in anguish. Pavel Pavlovitch was asleep on the other sofa.
He was dressed, and in his boots; his hat lay on the floor,
and his eye-glass hung by its cord almost to the ground.
Velchaninoff did not wake his guest. The room was full
of tobacco smoke, and the bottle was empty; he looked
savagely at the sleeping drunkard.
</p>

<p>
Having twisted himself painfully off his bed, Velchaninoff
began to walk about, groaning and thinking of his agony;
he could lie no longer.
</p>

<p>
He was alarmed for this pain in his chest, and not without
reason. He was subject to these attacks, and had been
so for many years; but they came seldom, luckily&mdash;once a
year or two years. On such occasions, his agony was so
dreadful for some ten hours or so that he invariably believed
that he must be actually dying.
</p>

<p>
This night, his anguish was terrible; it was too late to
send for the doctor, but it was far from morning yet. He
staggered up and down the room, and before long his
groans became loud and frequent.
</p>

<p>
The noise awoke Pavel Pavlovitch. He sat up on his
divan, and for some time gazed in terror and perplexity upon
Velchaninoff, as the latter walked moaning up and down.
At last he gathered his senses, and enquired anxiously
what was the matter.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff muttered something unintelligible.
</p>

<p>
<q>It's your kidneys&mdash;I'm sure it is,</q> cried Pavel, very wide
awake of a sudden. <q>I remember Peter Kuzmich used to
have the same sort of attacks. The kidneys&mdash;why, one can
die of it. Let me go and fetch Mavra.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, no; I don't want anything,</q> muttered Velchaninoff,
waving him off irritably.
</p>

<p>
But Pavel Pavlovitch&mdash;goodness knows why&mdash;was beside
himself with anxiety; he was as much exercised as though
the matter at issue were the saving of his own son's life. He
insisted on immediate compresses, and told Velchaninoff
he must drink two or three cups of very hot weak tea&mdash;boiling
hot. He ran for Mavra, lighted the fire in the kitchen,
put the kettle on, put the sick man back to bed,
covered him up, and within twenty minutes had the first
hot application all ready, as well as the tea.
</p>

<p>
<q>Hot plates, sir, hot plates,</q> he cried, as he clapped the
first, wrapped in a napkin, on to Velchaninoff's chest. <q>I
have nothing else handy; but I give you my word it's as
good as anything else. Drink this tea quick, never mind if
you scald your tongue&mdash;life is dearer. You can die of this
sort of thing, you know.</q> He sent sleepy Mavra out of
her wits with flurry; the plates were changed every couple
of minutes. At the third application, and after having taken
two cups of scalding tea, Velchaninoff suddenly felt decidedly
better.
</p>

<p>
<q>Capital! thank God! if we can once get the better of
the pain it's a good sign!</q> cried Pavel, delightedly, and
away he ran for another plate and some more tea.
</p>

<p>
<q>If only we can beat the pain down!</q> he kept muttering
to himself every minute.
</p>

<p>
In half an hour the agony was passed, but the sick man
was so completely knocked up that, in spite of Pavel's
repeated entreaties to be allowed to apply <q>just one more
plate,</q> he could bear no more. His eyes were drooping
from weakness.
</p>

<p>
<q>Sleep&mdash;sleep,</q> he muttered faintly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Very well,</q> consented Pavel, <q>go to sleep.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Are you spending the night here? What time is it?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nearly two.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You must sleep here.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, yes&mdash;all right. I will.</q>
</p>

<p>
A moment after the sick man called to Pavel again.
</p>

<p>
<q>You&mdash;you&mdash;</q> muttered the former faintly, as Pavel ran
up and bent over him, <q>you are better than I am. I understand
all&mdash;all&mdash;thank you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Go to sleep!</q> whispered Pavel Pavlovitch, as he crept
back to his divan on tip-toes.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff, dozing off, heard Pavel quietly make his
bed, undress and lie down, all very softly, and then put the
light out.
</p>

<p>
Undoubtedly Velchaninoff fell asleep very quietly when
the light was once out; he remembered that much afterwards.
Yet all the while he was asleep, and until he awoke, he
dreamed that he could not go to sleep in spite of his weakness.
At length he dreamed that he was delirious, and that
he could not for the life of him chase away the visions which
crowded in upon him, although he was conscious the whole
while they <emph>were</emph> but visions and not reality. The apparition
was familiar to him. He thought that his front door was
open, and that his room gradually filled with people pouring
in. At the table in the middle of the room, sat one man
exactly as had been the case a month before, during one of
his dreams. As on the previous occasion, this man leant on
his elbow at the table and would not speak; he was in a
round hat with a crape band.
</p>

<p>
<q>How?</q> thought the dreamer. <q>Was it really Pavel
Pavlovitch last time as well?</q> However, when he looked
at the man's face, he was convinced that it was quite
another person.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why has he a crape band, then?</q> thought Velchaninoff
in perplexity.
</p>

<p>
The noise and chattering of all these people was dreadful;
they seemed even more exasperated with Velchaninoff than
on the former occasion. They were all threatening him with
something or other, shaking their fists at him, and shouting
something which he could not understand.
</p>

<p>
<q>It's all a vision,</q> he dreamed, <q>I know quite well that
I am up and about, because I could not lie still for
anguish!</q>
</p>

<p>
Yet the cries and noise at times seemed so real that he
was now and again half-convinced of their reality.
</p>

<p>
<q>Surely this <emph>can't</emph> be delirium!</q> he thought. <q>What on
earth do all these people want of me&mdash;my God!</q>
</p>

<p>
Yet if it were not a vision, surely all these cries would have
roused Pavel Pavlovitch? There he was, fast asleep in his
divan!
</p>

<p>
Then something suddenly occurred as in the old
dream. Another crowd of people surged in, crushing those
who were already collected inside. These new arrivals
carried something large and heavy; he could judge of the
weight by their footsteps labouring upstairs.
</p>

<p>
Those in the room cried, <q>They're bringing it! they're
bringing it!</q>
</p>

<p>
Every eye flashed as it turned and glared at Velchaninoff;
every hand threatened him and then pointed to the stairs.
</p>

<p>
Undoubtedly it was reality, not delirium. Velchaninoff
thought that he stood up and raised himself on tip-toes, in
order to see over the heads of the crowd. He wanted to
know what was being carried in.
</p>

<p>
His heart beat wildly, wildly, wildly; and suddenly, as
in his former dream, there came one&mdash;two&mdash;three loud
rings at the bell.
</p>

<p>
And again, the sound of the bell was so distinct and
clear that he felt it <emph>could</emph> not be a dream. He gave a cry,
and awoke; but he did not rush to the door as on the
former occasion.
</p>

<p>
What sudden idea was it that guided his movements?
Had he any idea at all, or was it impulse that
prompted him what to do? He sprang up in bed, with
arms outstretched, as though to ward off an attack,
straight towards the divan where Pavel Pavlovitch was
sleeping.
</p>

<p>
His hands encountered other hands outstretched in his
direction; consequently some one must have been standing
over him.
</p>

<p>
The curtains were drawn, but it was not absolutely dark,
because a faint light came from the next room, which had
no curtains.
</p>

<p>
Suddenly something cut the palm of his left hand, some
of his fingers causing him sharp pain. He instantly realized
that he had seized a knife or a razor, and he closed his
hand upon it with the rapidity of thought.
</p>

<p>
At that moment something fell to the ground with a hard
metallic sound.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff was probably three times as strong as Pavel
Pavlovitch, but the struggle lasted for a long while&mdash;at least
three minutes.
</p>

<p>
The former, however, forced his adversary to the earth,
and bent his arms back behind his head; then he paused,
for he was most anxious to tie the hands. Holding the
assassin's wrist with his wounded left hand, he felt for the
blind cord with his right. For a long while he could
not find it; at last he grasped it, and tore it down.
</p>

<p>
He was amazed afterwards at the unnatural strength
which he must have displayed during all this.
</p>

<p>
During the whole of the struggle neither man spoke a
word; only their heavy breathing was audible, and the inarticulate
sounds emitted by both as they fought.
</p>

<p>
At length, having secured his opponent's hands, Velchaninoff
left him on the ground, rose, drew the curtains, and
pulled up the blind.
</p>

<p>
The deserted street was light now. He opened
the window, and stood breathing in the fresh air for a
few moments. It was a little past four o'clock. He shut
the window once more, fetched a towel and bound up
his cut hand as tightly as he could to stop the flow of
blood.
</p>

<p>
At his feet he caught sight of the opened razor lying on
the carpet; he picked it up, wiped it, and put it by in its
own case, which he now saw he had left upon the little
cupboard beside the divan which Pavel Pavlovitch occupied.
He locked the cupboard.
</p>

<p>
Having completed all these arrangements, he approached
Pavel Pavlovitch and looked at him. Meanwhile the latter
had managed to raise himself from the floor and reach a
chair; he was now sitting in it&mdash;undressed to his shirt,
which was stained with marks of blood both back and front&mdash;Velchaninoff's
blood, not his own.
</p>

<p>
Of course this was Pavel Pavlovitch; but it would have
been only natural for any one who had known him before,
and saw him at this moment, to doubt his identity. He sat
upright in his chair&mdash;very stiffly, owing to the uncomfortable
position of his tightly bound hands behind his back; his
face looked yellow and crooked, and he shuddered every
other moment. He gazed intently, but with an expression
of dazed perplexity, at Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
Suddenly he smiled gravely, and nodding towards a carafe
of water on the table, muttered, <q>A little drop!</q>
Velchaninoff poured some into a glass, and held it for
him to drink.
</p>

<p>
Pavel gulped a couple of mouthfuls greedily&mdash;then suddenly
raised his head and gazed intently at Velchaninoff
standing over him; he said nothing, however, but finished
the water. He then sighed deeply.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff took his pillows and some of his clothing,
and went into the next room, locking Pavel Pavlovitch
behind him.
</p>

<p>
His pain had quite disappeared, but he felt very weak
after the strain of his late exertion. Goodness knows
whence came his strength for the trial; he tried to think,
but he could not collect his ideas, the shock had been too
great.
</p>

<p>
His eyes would droop now and again, sometimes for ten
minutes at a time; then he would shudder, wake up, remember
all that had passed and raise the blood-stained rag
bound about his hand to prove the reality of his thoughts;
then he would relapse into eager, feverish thought. One
thing was quite certain, Pavel Pavlovitch had intended to
cut his throat, though, perhaps, a quarter of an hour before
the fatal moment he had not known that he would make
the attempt. Perhaps he had seen the razor case last evening,
and thought nothing of it, only remembering the fact
that it was there. The razors were usually locked up, and
only yesterday Velchaninoff had taken one out in order to
make himself neat for his visit to the country, and had
omitted to lock it up again.
</p>

<p>
<q>If he had premeditated murdering me, he would
certainly have provided himself with a knife or a pistol
long ago; he could not have relied on my razors, which he
never saw until yesterday,</q> concluded Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
At last the clock struck six. Velchaninoff arose, dressed
himself, and went into Pavel Pavlovitch's room. As he
opened the door he wondered why he had ever locked it,
and why he had not allowed Pavel to go away at once.
</p>

<p>
To his surprise the prisoner was dressed, he had doubtless
found means to get his hands loose. He was sitting in
an arm-chair, but rose when Velchaninoff entered. His hat
was in his hand.
</p>

<p>
His anxious look seemed to say as plain as words:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't talk to me! It's no use talking&mdash;don't talk to
me!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Go!</q> said Velchaninoff. <q>Take your jewel-case!</q> he
added.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch turned back and seized his bracelet-case,
stuffing it into his pocket, and went out.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff stood in the hall, waiting to shut the front
door after him.
</p>

<p>
Their looks met for the last time. Pavel Pavlovitch
stopped, and the two men gazed into each others eyes for
five seconds or so, as though in indecision. At length
Velchaninoff faintly waved him away with his hand.
</p>

<p>
<q>Go!</q> he said, only half aloud, as he closed the door
and turned the key.
</p>


</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XVI.</head>

<p>
A feeling of immense happiness took possession of
Velchaninoff; something was finished, and done with, and
settled. Some huge anxiety was at an end, so it seemed to
him. This anxiety had lasted five weeks.
</p>

<p>
He raised his hand and looked at the blood-stained rag
bound about it.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, yes!</q> he thought, <q>it is, indeed, all over now.</q>
</p>

<p>
And all this morning&mdash;the first time for many a day, he
did not even once think of Liza; just as if the blood from
those cut fingers had wiped out that grief as well, and
made him <q>quits</q> with it.
</p>

<p>
He quite realized how terrible was the danger which he
had passed through.
</p>

<p>
<q>For those people,</q> he thought, <q>who do not know a
minute or two before-hand that they are going to murder
you, when they once get the knife into their hands, and
feel the first touch of warm blood&mdash;Good Heaven! they
not only cut your throat, they hack your head off afterwards&mdash;right
off!</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff could not sit at home, he <emph>must</emph> go out and
let something happen to him, and he walked about in
hopes of something turning up; he longed to <emph>talk</emph>, and it
struck him that he might fairly go to the doctor and talk to
him, and have his hand properly bound up.
</p>

<p>
The doctor inquired how he hurt his hand, which
made Velchaninoff laugh like mad; he was on the point
of telling all, but refrained. Several times during the day
he was on the point of telling others the whole story. Once
it was to a perfect stranger in a restaurant, with whom he
had begun to converse on his own initiative. Before this
day he had hated the very idea of speaking to strangers in
the public restaurants.
</p>

<p>
He went into a shop and ordered some new clothes,
not with the idea of visiting the Pogoryeltseffs however&mdash;the
thought of any such visit was distasteful to him;
besides he could not leave town, he felt that he must
stay and see what was going to happen.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff dined and enjoyed his dinner, talking
affably to his neighbour and to the waiter as well. When
evening fell he went home, his head was whirling a little,
and he felt slightly delirious; the first sight of his rooms
gave him quite a start. He walked round them and reflected.
He visited the kitchen, which he had hardly ever
done before in his life, and thought, <q>This is where they
heated the plates last night.</q> He locked the doors
carefully, and lit his candles earlier than usual. As he shut
the door he remembered that he had asked Mavra, as he
passed the dvornik's lodging, whether Pavel Pavlovitch had
been. Just as if the latter could possibly have been near
the place!
</p>

<p>
Having then carefully locked himself in, he opened
the little cupboard where his razors were kept, and took
out <q>the</q> razor. There was still some of the blood on the
bone handle. He put the razor back again, and locked the
cupboard.
</p>

<p>
He was sleepy; he felt that he must go to sleep as speedily
as possible, otherwise he would be useless <q>for to-morrow,</q>
and to-morrow seemed to him for some reason or other to
be about to be a fateful day for him.
</p>

<p>
But all those thoughts which had crowded in upon him
all day, and had never left him for a moment, were still in
full swing within his brain; he thought, and thought, and
thought, and could not fall asleep.
</p>

<p>
If Pavel Pavlovitch arrived at murdering point accidentally,
had he ever seriously thought of murder even for a
single evil instant before? Velchaninoff decided the question
strangely enough: Pavel Pavlovitch <emph>had</emph> the desire to
murder him, but did not himself know of the existence of
this desire.
</p>

<p>
<q>It seems an absurd conclusion; but so it is!</q> thought
Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch did not come to Petersburg to look out
for a new appointment, nor did he come for the sake of
finding Bagantoff, in spite of his rage when the latter died.
No! he despised Bagantoff thoroughly. Pavel Pavlovitch
had come to St. Petersburg for <emph>him</emph>, and had brought Liza
with him, for him alone, Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>Did <emph>I</emph> expect to have my throat cut?</q> Velchaninoff
decided that he <emph>had</emph> expected it, from the moment when he
saw Pavel Pavlovitch in the carriage following in Bagantoff's
funeral procession. <q>That is I expected something&mdash;of
course, not exactly to have my throat cut! And surely&mdash;surely,
it was not all <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>bon&acirc; fide</foreign> yesterday,</q> he reflected,
raising his head from the pillow in the excitement of the
idea. <q rend='pre'><emph>Surely</emph> it cannot have been all in good faith that
that fellow assured me of his love for me, beating his breast,
and with his under lip trembling, as he spoke!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, it was absolutely <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>bon&acirc; fide</foreign>!</q> he decided. <q rend='pre'>This
quasimodo of T&mdash;&mdash; was quite good enough and generous
enough to fall in love with his wife's lover&mdash;his wife in
whom he never observed 'anything' during the twenty years
of their married life.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>He respected and loved me for nine years, and remembered
both me and my sayings. My goodness, to think of
that! and I knew nothing whatever of all this! Oh, no!
he was not lying yesterday! But did he love me <emph>while</emph> he
declared his love for me, and said that we must be <q>quits!</q>
Yes, he did, he loved me spitefully&mdash;and spiteful love is
sometimes the strongest of all.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I daresay I made a colossal impression upon him down
at T&mdash;&mdash;, for it is just upon such Schiller-like men that one is
liable to make a colossal impression. He exaggerated my
value a thousand fold; perhaps it was my <q>philosophical
retirement</q> that struck him! It would be curious to discover
precisely what it was that made so great an impression
upon him. Who knows, it may have been that I wore a
good pair of gloves, and knew how to put them on. These
quasimodo fellows love &aelig;stheticism to distraction! Give
them a start in the direction of admiration for yourself, and
they will do all the rest, and give you a thousand times
more than your due of every virtue that exists; will fight
to the death for you with pleasure, if you ask it of them.
How high he must have held my aptitude for illusionizing
others; perhaps that has struck him as much as anything
else! for he remarked: <q>If <emph>this</emph> man deceived me, whom
am I ever to trust again!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>After such a cry as that a man may well turn wild beast.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And he came here to 'embrace and weep over me,'
as he expressed it. H'm! that means he came to cut my
throat, and <emph>thought</emph> that he came to embrace and weep over
me. He brought Liza with him, too.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>What if I <emph>had</emph> wept with him and embraced him? Perhaps
he really would have fully and entirely forgiven me&mdash;for
he was yearning to forgive me, I could see that! And
all this turned to drunkenness and bestiality at the first
check. Yes, Pavel Pavlovitch, the most deformed of all
deformities is the abortion with noble feelings. And this
man was foolish enough to take me down to see his
<q>bride.</q> My goodness! his bride! Only such a lunatic
of a fellow could ever have developed so wild an idea as a
<q>new existence</q> to be inaugurated by an alliance between
himself and Nadia. But you are not to blame, Pavel
Pavlovitch, you are a deformity, and all your ideas and
actions and aspirations must of necessity be deformed.
But deformity though he be, why in the world was <emph>my</emph>
sanction, <emph>my</emph> blessing, as it were, necessary to his union
with Miss Zachlebnikoff? Perhaps he sincerely hoped that
there, with so much sweet innocence and charm around us,
we should fall into each other's arms in some leafy spot,
and weep out our differences on each other's shoulders?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Was <emph>murder</emph> in his thoughts when I caught him standing
between our beds that first time, in the darkness? No. I
think not. And yet the first idea of it may have entered
his soul as he stood there&mdash;And if I had not left the
razors out, probably nothing would have happened. Surely
that is so; for he avoided me for weeks&mdash;he was <emph>sorry</emph>
for me, and avoided me. He chose Bagantoff to expend
his wrath upon, first, not me! He jumped out of bed and
fussed over the hot plates, to divert his mind from murder
perhaps&mdash;from the knife to charity! Perhaps he tried to
save both himself and me by his hot plates!</q>
</p>

<p>
So mused Velchaninoff, his poor overwrought brain
working on and on, and jumping from conclusion to conclusion
with the endless activity of fever, until he fell asleep.
Next morning he awoke with no less tired brain and body,
but with a new terror, an unexpected and novel feeling of
dread hanging over him.
</p>

<p>
This dread consisted in the fact that he felt that
he, Velchaninoff, must go and see Pavel Pavlovitch
that very day; he knew not why he must go, but he felt
drawn to go, as though by some unseen force. The idea
was too loathsome to look into, so he left it to take care of
itself as an unalterable fact. The madness of it, however,
was modified, and the whole aspect of the thought became
more reasonable, after a while, when it took shape and
resolved itself into a conviction in Velchaninoff's mind that
Pavel Pavlovitch had returned home, locked himself up,
and hung himself to the bedpost, as Maria Sisevna had
described of the wretched suicide witnessed by poor Liza.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why should the fool hang himself?</q> he repeated over
and over again; yet the thought <emph>would</emph> return that he was
bound to hang himself, as Liza had said that he threatened
to do. Velchaninoff could not help adding that if he were
in Pavel Pavlovitch's place he would probably do the same.
</p>

<p>
So the end of it was that instead of going out to his
dinner, he set off for Pavel Pavlovitch's lodging, <q>just to
ask Maria Sisevna after him.</q> But before he had reached
the street he paused and his face flushed up with shame.
<q>Surely I am not going there to embrace and weep over
him! Surely I am not going to add this one last pitiful
folly to the long list of my late shameful actions!</q>
</p>

<p>
However, his good providence saved him from this <q>pitiful
folly,</q> for he had hardly passed through the large gateway
into the street, when Alexander Loboff suddenly
collided with him. The young fellow was dashing along in a
state of great excitement.
</p>

<p>
<q>I was just coming to you. Our friend Pavel Pavlovitch&mdash;a
nice sort of fellow he is&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Has he hung himself?</q> gasped Velchaninoff.
</p>

<p>
<q>Hung himself? Who? Why?</q> asked Loboff, with
his eyes starting out of his head.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! go on, I meant nothing!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Tfu! What a funny line your thoughts seem to take.
He hasn't hung himself a bit&mdash;why in the world should he?&mdash;on
the contrary, he's gone away. I've just seen him off!
My goodness, how that fellow can drink! We had three
bottles of wine. Predposiloff was there too&mdash;but how the
fellow drinks! Good heavens! he was singing in the
carriage when the train went off! He thought of you, and
kissed his hand to you, and sent his love. He's a scamp,
that fellow, eh?</q>
</p>

<p>
Young Loboff had apparently had quite his share of the
three bottles, his face was flushed and his utterance thick.
Velchaninoff roared with laughter.
</p>

<p>
<q>So you ended up by weeping over each others shoulders,
did you? Ha-ha-ha! Oh, you poetical, Schiller-ish, funny
fellows, you!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't scold us. You must know he went down <emph>there</emph>
yesterday and to-day, and he has withdrawn. He <q>sneaked</q>
like anything about Nadia and me. They've shut her up.
There was such a row, but we wouldn't give way&mdash;and, my
word, how the fellow drinks! He was always talking about
you; but, of course, he is no companion for you. You are,
more or less, a respectable sort of man, and must have
belonged to society at some time of your life, though you
seem to have retired into private life just now. Is it poverty,
or what? I couldn't make head or tail of Pavel Pavlovitch's
story.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh! Then it was he who gave you those interesting
details about me?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes; don't be cross about it. It's better to be a
citizen than <q>a swell</q> any-day! The thing is one does not
know whom to respect in Russia nowadays! Don't you
think it a diseased feature of the times, in Russia, that one
doesn't know whom to respect?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite so, quite so. Well, go on about Pavel
Pavlovitch&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, he sat down in the railway carriage and began
singing, then he cried a bit. It was really disgusting to see
the fellow. I hate fools! Then he began to throw money
to beggars <q>for the repose of Liza's soul,</q> he said. Is that his
wife?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Daughter.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What's the matter with your hand?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I cut it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>H'm! Never mind, cheer up! It'll be all right soon!
I am glad that fellow has gone, you know,&mdash;confound
him! But I bet anything he'll marry as soon as he arrives
at his place.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, what of that? You are going to marry, too!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I! That's quite a different affair! What a funny man
you are! Why, if <emph>you</emph> are fifty, he must be sixty! Well,
ta-ta! Glad I met you&mdash;can't come in&mdash;don't ask me&mdash;no
time!</q>
</p>

<p>
He started off at a run, but turned a minute after and
came back.
</p>

<p>
<q>What a fool I am!</q> he cried, <q>I forgot all about it&mdash;he
sent you a letter. Here it is. How was it you didn't
see him off? Ta-ta!</q>
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff returned home and opened the letter, which
was sealed and addressed to himself.
</p>

<p>
There was not a syllable inside in Pavel Pavlovitch's own
hand writing; but he drew out another letter, and knew the
writing at once. It was an old, faded, yellow-looking sheet
of paper, and the ink was faint and discoloured; the letter
was addressed to Velchaninoff, and written ten years before&mdash;a
couple of months after his departure from T&mdash;&mdash;. He had
never received a copy of this one, but another letter, which
he well remembered, had evidently been written and sent
instead of it; he could tell that by the substance of the faded
document in his hand. In this present letter Natalia
Vasilievna bade farewell to him for ever (as she had done
in the other communication), and informed him that she
expected her confinement in a few months. She added,
for his consolation, that she would find an opportunity of
purveying his child to him in good time, and pointed out
that their friendship was now cemented for ever. She
begged him to love her no longer, because she could no
longer return his love, but authorized him to pay a visit to
T&mdash;&mdash; after a year's absence, in order to see the child. Goodness
only knows why she had not sent this letter, but had
changed it for another!
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff was deadly pale when he read this document;
but he imagined Pavel Pavlovitch finding it in the family
box of black wood with mother-of-pearl ornamentation and
silver mounting, and reading it for the first time!
</p>

<p>
<q>I should think he, too, grew as pale as a corpse,</q> he
reflected, catching sight of his own face in the looking-glass.
<q>Perhaps he read it and then closed his eyes and hoped
and prayed that when he opened them again the dreadful
letter would be nothing but a sheet of white paper once
more! Perhaps the poor fellow tried this desperate expedient
two or three times before he accepted the truth!</q>
</p>


</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc2" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XVII.</head>

<head type="sub">THE PERMANENT HUSBAND.</head>


<p>
Two years have elapsed since the events recorded in the
foregoing chapters, and we find our friend Velchaninoff, one
lovely summer day, seated in a railway carriage on his
way to Odessa; he was making the journey for the purpose
of seeing a great friend, and of being introduced to a lady
whose acquaintance he had long wished to make.
</p>

<p>
Without entering into any details, we may remark that
Velchaninoff was entirely changed during these last two years.
He was no longer the miserable, fanciful hypochondriac
of those dark days. He had returned to society and to his
friends, who gladly forgave him his temporary relapse into
seclusion. Even those whom he had ceased to bow to,
when met, were now among the first to extend the hand of
friendship once more, and asked no questions&mdash;just as
though he had been abroad on private business, which was
no affair of theirs.
</p>

<p>
His success in the legal matters of which we have heard,
and the fact of having his sixty thousand roubles safe at his
bankers&mdash;enough to keep him all his life&mdash;was the elixir
which brought him back to health and spirits. His
premature wrinkles departed, his eyes grew brighter, and his
complexion better; he became more active and vigorous&mdash;in
fact, as he sat thinking in a comfortable first-class
carriage, he looked a very different man from the Velchaninoff
of two years ago.
</p>

<p>
The next station to be reached was that at which passengers
were expected to dine, forty minutes being allowed for
this purpose.
</p>

<p>
It so happened that Velchaninoff, while seated at the
dinner table, was able to do a service to a lady who was
also dining there. This lady was young and nice looking,
though rather too flashily dressed, and was accompanied by
a young officer who unfortunately was scarcely in a befitting
condition for ladies' society, having refreshed himself
at the bar to an unnecessary extent. This young man succeeded
in quarrelling with another person equally unfit for
ladies' society, and a brawl ensued, which threatened to land
both parties upon the table in close proximity to the lady.
Velchaninoff interfered, and removed the brawlers to a safe
distance, to the great and almost boundless gratitude of the
alarmed lady, who hailed him as her <q>guardian angel.</q>
Velchaninoff was interested in the young woman, who
looked like a respectable provincial lady&mdash;of provincial
manners and taste, as her dress and gestures showed.
</p>

<p>
A conversation was opened, and the lady immediately
commenced to lament that her husband was <q>never by
when he was wanted,</q> and that he had now gone and
hidden himself somewhere just because he happened to be
required.
</p>

<p>
<q>Poor fellow, he'll catch it for this,</q> thought Velchaninoff.
<q>If you will tell me your husband's name,</q> he added
aloud, <q>I will find him, with pleasure.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Pavel Pavlovitch,</q> hiccupped the young officer.
</p>

<p>
<q>Your husband's name is Pavel Pavlovitch, is it?</q>
inquired Velchaninoff with curiosity, and at the same
moment a familiar bald head was interposed between the
lady and himself.
</p>

<p>
<q>Here you are <emph>at last</emph>,</q> cried the wife, hysterically.
</p>

<p>
It was indeed Pavel Pavlovitch.
</p>

<p>
He gazed in amazement and dread at Velchaninoff, falling
back before him just as though he saw a ghost. So great
was his consternation, that for some time it was clear that
he did not understand a single word of what his wife was
telling him&mdash;which was that Velchaninoff had acted as her
guardian angel, and that he (Pavel) ought to be ashamed of
himself for never being at hand when he was wanted.
</p>

<p>
At last Pavel Pavlovitch shuddered, and woke up to
consciousness.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff suddenly burst out laughing. <q>Why, we
are old friends</q>&mdash;he cried, <q>friends from childhood!</q> He
clapped his hand familiarly and encouragingly on Pavel's
shoulder. Pavel smiled wanly. <q>Hasn't he ever spoken
to you of Velchaninoff?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, never,</q> said the wife, a little confused.
</p>

<p>
<q>Then introduce me to your wife, you faithless friend!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>This&mdash;this is Mr. Velchaninoff!</q> muttered Pavel
Pavlovitch, looking the picture of confusion.
</p>

<p>
All went swimmingly after this. Pavel Pavlovitch was
despatched to cater for the party, while his lady informed
Velchaninoff that they were on their way from O&mdash;&mdash;,
where Pavel Pavlovitch served, to their country place&mdash;a
lovely house, she said, some twenty-five miles away. There
they hoped to receive a party of friends, and if Mr. Velchaninoff
would be so very kind as to take pity on their
rustic home, and honour it with a visit, she should do her
best to show her gratitude to the guardian angel who, etc.,
etc. Velchaninoff replied that he would be delighted; and
that he was an idle man, and always free&mdash;adding a compliment
or two which caused the fair lady to blush with delight,
and to tell Pavel Pavlovitch, who now returned from his
quest, that Alexey Ivanovitch had been so kind as to
promise to pay them a visit next week, and stay a whole
month.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch, to the amazed wrath of his wife,
smiled a sickly smile, and said nothing.
</p>

<p>
After dinner the party bade farewell to Velchaninoff, and
returned to their carriage, while the latter walked up and
down the platform smoking his cigar; he knew that Pavel
Pavlovitch would return to talk to him.
</p>

<p>
So it turned out. Pavel came up with an expression of
the most anxious and harassed misery. Velchaninoff
smiled, took his arm, led him to a seat, and sat down beside
him. He did not say anything, for he was anxious that
Pavel should make the first move.
</p>

<p>
<q>So you are coming to us?</q> murmured the latter at
last, plunging <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in medias res</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
<q>I knew you'd begin like that! you haven't changed an
atom!</q> cried Velchaninoff, roaring with laughter, and
slapping him confidentially on the back. <q>Surely, you
don't really suppose that I ever had the smallest intention
of visiting you&mdash;and staying a month too!</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch gave a start.
</p>

<p>
<q>Then you're <emph>not</emph> coming?</q> he cried, without an attempt
to hide his joy.
</p>

<p>
<q>No, no! of course not!</q> replied Velchaninoff, laughing.
He did not know why, but all this was exquisitely
droll to him; and the further it went the funnier it seemed.
</p>

<p>
<q>Really&mdash;are you really serious?</q> cried Pavel, jumping
up.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes; I tell you, I won't come&mdash;not for the world!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But what will my wife say now? She thinks you intend
to come!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, tell her I've broken my leg&mdash;or anything you
like!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>She won't believe!</q> said Pavel, looking anxious.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ha-ha-ha! You catch it at home, I see! Tell me,
who is that young officer?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, a distant relative of mine&mdash;an unfortunate
young fellow&mdash;&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Pavel Pavlovitch!</q> cried a voice from the carriage,
<q>the second bell has rung!</q>
</p>

<p>
Pavel was about to move off&mdash;Velchaninoff stopped him.
</p>

<p>
<q>Shall I go and tell your wife how you tried to cut my
throat?</q> he said.
</p>

<p>
<q>What are you thinking of&mdash;God forbid!</q> cried Pavel,
in a terrible fright.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, go along, then!</q> said the other, loosing his
hold of Pavel's shoulder.
</p>

<p>
<q>Then&mdash;then&mdash;you won't come, will you?</q> said Pavel
once more, timidly and despairingly, and clasping his hands
in entreaty.
</p>

<p>
<q>No&mdash;I won't&mdash;I swear!&mdash;run away&mdash;you'll be late!</q>
He put out his hand mechanically, then recollected himself,
and shuddered. Pavel did not take the proffered hand, he
withdrew his own.
</p>

<p>
The third bell rang.
</p>

<p>
An instantaneous but total change seemed to have come
over both. Something snapped within Velchaninoff's heart&mdash;so
it seemed to him, and he who had been roaring with
laughter a moment before, seized Pavel Pavlovitch angrily
by the shoulder.
</p>

<p>
<q>If I&mdash;<emph>I</emph> offer you my hand, sir</q> (he showed the scar on
the palm of his left hand)&mdash;<q>if <emph>I</emph> can offer you my hand,
sir, I should think <emph>you</emph> might accept it!</q> he hissed with
white and trembling lips.
</p>

<p>
Pavel Pavlovitch grew deadly white also, his lips quivered
and a convulsion seemed to run through his features:
</p>

<p>
<q>And&mdash;Liza?</q> he whispered quickly. Suddenly his whole
face worked, and tears started to his eyes.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff stood like a log before him.
</p>

<p>
<q>Pavel Pavlovitch! Pavel Pavlovitch!</q> shrieked the
voice from the carriage, in despairing accents, as though
some one were being murdered.
</p>

<p>
Pavel roused himself and started to run. At that
moment the engine whistled, and the train moved off.
Pavel Pavlovitch just managed to cling on, and so climb
into his carriage, as it moved out of the station.
</p>

<p>
Velchaninoff waited for another train, and then continued
his journey to Odessa.
</p>


<p rend="font-size: large;text-align: center"><lb /><lb />
THE END.
</p>
<p>
<milestone unit="tb" rend="rule: 50%" />
</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
PRINTED BY CHAS. STRAKER AND SONS, LONDON AND REDHILL.
</p>
</div>
<milestone unit="tb" rend="rule: 50%" />
<div>
<p rend="font-size: x-large;text-align: center">
Masterpieces of Modern French Fiction.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>MADEMOISELLE DE MAUPIN.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Theophile
Gautier</hi>. With 17 High-class Etchings. Price 10s. 6d.,
elegantly bound.
</p>

<p><quote rend="display">
<q>The goldenbook of spirit and sense, the Holy Writ of beauty.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>A. C. Swinburne</hi>
</quote>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>RENEE MAUPERIN.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Edmond</hi> and <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jules de Goncourt</hi>.
With Page Illustrations by <hi rend='smallcaps'>James Tissot</hi>. Price
6s., handsomely bound.
</p>

<p>
<quote rend="display">
<q>One of the most pathetic romances of our day. Running through almost the
whole gamut of human passion, it has the alternatives of sunshine and shade that
exist in real life.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Morning Post.</hi>
</quote>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>GERMINIE LACERTEUX.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Edmond</hi> and <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jules de
Goncourt</hi>. Illustrated with Highly-finished Etchings.
Price 6s., handsomely bound.
</p>

<p>
<quote rend="display">
<q>For myself, I can say that I could not lay the book down for a moment until
I had finished it.</q>&mdash;Letters on Books in <hi rend='italic'>Truth</hi>.
</quote>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>A LOVE CRIME.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Paul Bourget</hi>. Price 3s. 6d.
Uniform with <q>A Cruel Enigma.</q>
</p>

<p>
<quote rend="display">
<q>Who could take up such books, by the way admirably translated, and not be
simply and absolutely spell-bound?</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Truth.</hi>
</quote>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>A CRUEL ENIGMA.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Paul Bourget</hi>. In tasteful
binding. Price 3s. 6d.
</p>

<p>
<quote rend="display">
<q>M. Bourget's most remarkable work, <q>A Cruel Enigma,</q> has placed him
above all competitors.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Athen&aelig;um.</hi>
</quote>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>FANNY.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ernest Feydeau</hi>. A Famous French Novel.
In tasteful binding. Price 3s. 6d.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>MY UNCLE BARBASSOU.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Mario Uchard</hi>. With
40 charming Etchings by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Paul Avril</hi>. Price 15s.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>THE BOHEMIANS OF THE LATIN QUARTER</hi>
(Scenes de la Vie de Boh&eacute;me). By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Henri Murger</hi>. In
demy 8vo. Illustrated with 10 full-page Etchings by <hi rend='smallcaps'>C.
Courtry</hi> from designs by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Montader</hi>. Price 7s. 6d.
</p>

<p>
<quote rend="display">
<q>Illustrations and text are equally charming.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Scotsman.</hi>
</quote>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>THE EMOTIONS OF POLYDORE MARASQUIN.</hi> By
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Leon Gozlan</hi>. With upwards of 100 Illustrations. Price 3s. 6d.
</p>

<p>
<quote rend="display">
<q>There is a deep fund of genuine humour and brilliant imagination in M. Gozlan's
book.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Morning Post.</hi>
</quote>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>MADAME BOVARY: Provincial Manners.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Gustave
Flaubert</hi>. Illustrated with Etchings by French Artists.
Price 6s., elegantly bound.
</p>

<p>
<quote rend="display">
<q><q>Madame Bovary</q> grips your very vitals with an invincible power, like some
scene you have really witnessed, some event which is actually happening before
your eyes.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Emile Zola.</hi>
</quote>

<hi rend='bold'>SALAMBO.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Gustave Flaubert</hi>. With Six Etchings
by Pierre Vidal and a Portrait of the Author from a Drawing
by Flaubert's Niece. Price 6s.

</p>

<p>
<quote rend="display">
<q>The Translator has thoroughly understood the original, and has succeeded in
putting it into good English. The type, paper, and material execution of the
volume, inside and out, leave nothing to be desired.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Westminster Review.</hi>
</quote>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>PAPA, MAMMA, and BABY.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Gustave Droz</hi>. Illustrated
with 16 page Engravings. Price 3/6, attractively bound.
</p>

<p>
<quote rend="display">
<q>The exquisite lightness, brightness, and daintiness of M. Droz's pencil.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Truth.</hi>
</quote>
</p>

<p>
<quote rend="display">
<q>The lover who is a husband and the wife who is in love with the man she has
married have never before been so attractively portrayed.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Pictorial World.</hi>
</quote>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>SAPPHO: Parisian Manners.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Alphonse Daudet</hi>. With
32 highly-finished page Engravings, cloth gilt, price 3/6.
</p>

<p>
<quote rend="display">
<q>The book is full of appalling realism. The characters painted by the author are
singularly striking, vivid, and as true to nature as they are powerfully drawn</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Daily
Telegraph.</hi>
</quote>
</p>

<p rend="font-size: x-large;text-align: center">
<milestone unit="tb" rend="rule: 50%" />
Mr. GEO. MOORE'S REALISTIC NOVELS.
</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
Second Edition. Price 3s. 6d.
</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
A MERE ACCIDENT: A Realistic Story.
</p>

<p>
<quote rend="display">
<q>The <q>Mere Accident</q> is treated with a power and pathos which only serve
to enhance the painfulness of the affair.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Times.</hi>
</quote>
</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
Sixth Edition, with a Frontispiece, 3s. 6d.
</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
A DRAMA IN MUSLIN.
</p>

<p>
<quote rend="display">
<q>The hideous comedy of the marriage market has been a stock topic with
novelists from Thackeray downwards; but Mr. Moore goes deep into the yet more
hideous tragedy which forms its afterpiece.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Pall Mall Gazette.</hi>
</quote>
</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
Eleventh and Cheaper Edition, 2s.
</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
A MUMMER'S WIFE.
</p>

<p>
<quote rend="display">
<q>A striking book, different in tone from current English fiction. The woman's
character is a very powerful study.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Athen&aelig;um.</hi>
</quote>
</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
Fourth Edition, 2s.
</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
A MODERN LOVER.
</p>

<p>
<quote rend="display">
<q>It would be difficult to praise too highly the strength, truth, delicacy and
pathos of the incident of Gwynne Lloyd, and the admirable treatment of the great
sacrifice she makes. The incident is depicted with skill and beauty.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Spectator.</hi>
</quote>
</p>

<p rend="font-size: x-large;text-align: center">
<milestone unit="tb" rend="rule: 50%" />
THE BOULEVARD NOVELS.
</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
Pictures of Paris Morals and Manners.
</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
In small 8vo, attractively bound, price 2s. 6d. each.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='bold'>NANA'S DAUGHTER.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>A. Sirven</hi> and <hi rend='smallcaps'>H. Leverdier</hi>.</l>
<l><hi rend='bold'>THE YOUNG GUARD.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Vast-Ricouard</hi>.</l>
<l><hi rend='bold'>THE WOMAN OF FIRE.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Adolphe Belot</hi>.</l>
<l><hi rend='bold'>ODETTE'S MARRIAGE.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Alphonse Delpit</hi>.</l>
<l><hi rend='bold'>THE VIRGIN WIDOW.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>A. Matthey</hi>.</l>
<l><hi rend='bold'>SEALED LIPS.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>F. du Boisgobey</hi>.</l>
<l><hi rend='bold'>A LADIES' MAN.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guy de Maupassant</hi>.</l>
<l><hi rend='bold'>A WOMAN'S LIFE.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guy de Maupassant</hi>.</l>
<l><hi rend='bold'>A MYSTERY STILL.</hi> By <hi rend='smallcaps'>F. du Boisgobey</hi>.</l>
</lg>
</div>
        </body>
  <back rend="page-break-before: right">
    <div id="footnotes">
      <index index="toc" />
      <index index="pdf" />
      <head>Footnotes</head>
      <divGen type="footnotes"/>
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: right">
      <divGen type="pgfooter" />
    </div>

  </back>
    </text>
</TEI.2>
